   1  THE THREE PRESENTS OF D'ARTAGNAN THE ELDER

    On the first Monday of the month of April, 1625, the market townof Meung, in which the author of ROMANCE OF THE ROSE was born,appeared to be in as perfect a state of revolution as if theHuguenots had just made a second La Rochelle of it.  Manycitizens, seeing the women flying toward the High Street, leavingtheir children crying at the open doors, hastened to don thecuirass, and supporting their somewhat uncertain courage with amusket or a partisan, directed their steps toward the hostelry ofthe Jolly Miller, before which was gathered, increasing everyminute, a compact group, vociferous and full of curiosity.
In those times panics were common, and few days passed withoutsome city or other registering in its archives an event of thiskind.  There were nobles, who made war against each other; therewas the king, who made war against the cardinal; there was Spain,which made war against the king.  Then, in addition to theseconcealed or public, secret or open wars, there were robbers,mendicants, Huguenots, wolves, and scoundrels, who made war uponeverybody.  The citizens always took up arms readily againstthieves, wolves or scoundrels, often against nobles or Huguenots,sometimes against the king, but never against cardinal or Spain.It resulted, then, from this habit that on the said first Mondayof April, 1625, the citizens, on hearing the clamor, and seeingneither the red-and-yellow standard nor the livery of the Duc deRichelieu, rushed toward the hostel of the Jolly Miller.  
Whenarrived there, the cause of the hubbub was apparent to all.A young man--we can sketch his portrait at a dash.  Imagine toyourself a Don Quixote of eighteen; a Don Quixote without hiscorselet, without his coat of mail, without his cuisses; a DonQuixote clothed in a wooden doublet, the blue color of which hadfaded into a nameless shade between lees of wine and a heavenlyazure; face long and brown; high cheek bones, a sign of sagacity;the maxillary muscles enormously developed, an infallible sign bywhich a Gascon may always be detected, even without his cap--andour young man wore a cap set off with a sort of feather; the eyeopen and intelligent; the nose hooked, but finely chiseled.  
Toobig for a youth, too small for a grown man, an experienced eyemight have taken him for a farmer's son upon a journey had it notbeen for the long sword which, dangling from a leather baldric,hit against the calves of its owner as he walked, and against therough side of his steed when he was on horseback.For our young man had a steed which was the observed of allobservers.  It was a Bearn pony, from twelve to fourteen yearsold, yellow in his hide, without a hair in his tail, but notwithout windgalls on his legs, which, though going with his headlower than his knees, rendering a martingale quite unnecessary,contrived nevertheless to perform his eight leagues a day.Unfortunately, the qualities of this horse were so well concealedunder his strange-colored hide and his unaccountable gait, thatat a time when everybody was a connoisseur in horseflesh, theappearance of the aforesaid pony at Meung--which place he hadentered about a quarter of an hour before, by the gate ofBeaugency--produced an unfavorable feeling, which extended to hisrider.

    And this feeling had been more painfully perceived by youngD'Artagnan--for so was the Don Quixote of this second Rosinantenamed--from his not being able to conceal from himself theridiculous appearance that such a steed gave him, good horsemanas he was.  He had sighed deeply, therefore, when accepting thegift of the pony from M. D'Artagnan the elder.  He was notignorant that such a beast was worth at least twenty livres; andthe words which had accompanied the present were above all price."My son," said the old Gascon gentleman, in that pure BearnPATOIS of which Henry IV could never rid himself, "this horse wasborn in the house of your father about thirteen years ago, andhas remained in it ever since, which ought to make you love it.Never sell it; allow it to die tranquilly and honorably of oldage, and if you make a campaign with it, take as much care of itas you would of an old servant.  At court, provided you have everthe honor to go there," continued M. D'Artagnan the elder, "--anhonor to which, remember, your ancient nobility gives you theright--sustain worthily your name of gentleman, which has beenworthily borne by your ancestors for five hundred years, both foryour own sake and the sake of those who belong to you.  
By thelatter I mean your relatives and friends.  Endure nothing fromanyone except Monsieur the Cardinal and the king.  It is by hiscourage, please observe, by his courage alone, that a gentlemancan make his way nowadays.  Whoever hesitates for a secondperhaps allows the bait to escape which during that exact secondfortune held out to him.  You are young.  You ought to be bravefor two reasons:  the first is that you are a Gascon, and thesecond is that you are my son.  Never fear quarrels, but seekadventures.  I have taught you how to handle a sword; you havethews of iron, a wrist of steel.  Fight on all occasions.  Fightthe more for duels being forbidden, since consequently there istwice as much courage in fighting.  I have nothing to give you,my son, but fifteen crowns, my horse, and the counsels you havejust heard.  Your mother will add to them a recipe for a certainbalsam, which she had from a Bohemian and which has themiraculous virtue of curing all wounds that do not reach theheart.  Take advantage of all, and live happily and long.  I havebut one word to add, and that is to propose an example to you--not mine, for I myself have never appeared at court, and haveonly taken part in religious wars as a volunteer;
I speak ofMonsieur de Treville, who was formerly my neighbor, and who hadthe honor to be, as a child, the play-fellow of our king, LouisXIII, whom God preserve!  Sometimes their play degenerated intobattles, and in these battles the king was not always thestronger.  The blows which he received increased greatly hisesteem and friendship for Monsieur de Treville.  Afterward,Monsieur de Treville fought with others: in his first journey toParis, five times; from the death of the late king till the youngone came of age, without reckoning wars and sieges, seven times;and from that date up to the present day, a hundred times,perhaps!  So that in spite of edicts, ordinances, and decrees,there he is, captain of the Musketeers; that is to say, chief ofa legion of Caesars, whom the king holds in great esteem and whomthe cardinal dreads--he who dreads nothing, as it is said.  Stillfurther, Monsieur de Treville gains ten thousand crowns a year;he is therefore a great noble.  He began as you begin.  Go to himwith this letter, and make him your model in order that you maydo as he has done."

    Upon which M. D'Artagnan the elder girded his own sword round hisson, kissed him tenderly on both cheeks, and gave him hisbenediction.

    On leaving the paternal chamber, the young man found his mother,who was waiting for him with the famous recipe of which thecounsels we have just repeated would necessitate frequentemployment.  The adieux were on this side longer and more tenderthan they had been on the other--not that M. D'Artagnan  did notlove his son, who was his only offspring, but M. D'Artagnan was aman, and he would have considered it unworthy of a man to giveway to his feelings; whereas Mme. D'Artagnan was a woman, andstill more, a mother.  She wept abundantly; and--let us speak itto the praise of M. D'Artagnan the younger--notwithstanding theefforts he made to remain firm, as a future Musketeer ought,nature prevailed, and he shed many tears, of which he succeededwith great difficulty in concealing the half.

    The same day the young man set forward on his journey, furnishedwith the three paternal gifts, which consisted, as we have said,of fifteen crowns, the horse, and the letter for M. de Treville--the counsels being thrown into the bargain.

    With such a VADE MECUM D'Artagnan was morally and physically anexact copy of the hero of Cervantes, to whom we so happilycompared him when our duty of an historian placed us under thenecessity of sketching his portrait.  Don Quixote took windmillsfor giants, and sheep for armies; D'Artagnan took every smile foran insult, and every look as a provocation--whence it resultedthat from Tarbes to Meung his fist was constantly doubled, or hishand on the hilt of his sword; and yet the fist did not descendupon any jaw, nor did the sword issue from its scabbard.  It wasnot that the sight of the wretched pony did not excite numeroussmiles on the countenances of passers-by; but as against the sideof this pony rattled a sword of respectable length, and as overthis sword gleamed an eye rather ferocious than haughty, thesepassers-by repressed their hilarity, or if hilarity prevailedover prudence, they endeavored to laugh only on one side, likethe masks of the ancients.  D'Artagnan, then, remained majesticand intact in his susceptibility, till he came to this unluckycity of Meung.

    But there, as he was alighting from his horse at the gate of theJolly Miller, without anyone--host, waiter, or hostler--coming tohold his stirrup or take his horse, D'Artagnan spied, though anopen window on the ground floor, a gentleman, well-made and ofgood carriage, although of rather a stern countenance, talkingwith two persons who appeared to listen to him with respect.D'Artagnan fancied quite naturally, according to his custom, thathe must be the object of their conversation, and listened.  Thistime D'Artagnan was only in part mistaken; he himself was not inquestion, but his horse was. The gentleman appeared to beenumerating all his qualities to his auditors; and, as I havesaid, the auditors seeming to have great deference for thenarrator, they every moment burst into fits of laughter.  Now, asa half-smile was sufficient to awaken the irascibility of theyoung man, the effect produced upon him by this vociferous mirthmay be easily imagined.

    Nevertheless, D'Artagnan was desirous of examining the appearance of this impertinent personage who ridiculed him.  He fixed hishaughty eye upon the stranger, and perceived a man of from fortyto forty-five years of age, with black and piercing eyes, palecomplexion, a strongly marked nose, and a black and well-shapedmustache.  He was dressed in a doublet and hose of a violetcolor, with aiguillettes of the same color, without any otherornaments than the customary slashes, through which the shirtappeared.  This doublet and hose, though new, were creased, liketraveling clothes for a long time packed in a portmanteau.D'Artagnan made all these remarks with the rapidity of a mostminute observer, and doubtless from an instinctive feeling thatthis stranger was destined to have a great influence over hisfuture life.

    Now, as at the moment in which D'Artagnan fixed his eyes upon thegentleman in the violet doublet, the gentleman made one of hismost knowing and profound remarks respecting the Bearnese pony,his two auditors laughed even louder than before, and he himself,though contrary to his custom, allowed a pale smile (if I mayallowed to use such an expression) to stray over his countenance.This time there could be no doubt; D'Artagnan was reallyinsulted.  
Full, then, of this conviction, he pulled his cap downover his eyes, and endeavoring to copy some of the court airs hehad picked up in Gascony among young traveling nobles, headvanced with one hand on the hilt of his sword and the otherresting on his hip.  Unfortunately, as he advanced, his angerincreased at every step; and instead of the proper and loftyspeech he had prepared as a prelude to his challenge, he foundnothing at the tip of his tongue but a gross personality, whichhe accompanied with a furious gesture.

    "I say, sir, you sir, who are hiding yourself behind thatshutter--yes, you, sir, tell me what you are laughing at, and wewill laugh together!"

    The gentleman raised his eyes slowly from the nag to hiscavalier, as if he required some time to ascertain whether itcould be to him that such strange reproaches were addressed;then, when he could not possibly entertain any doubt of thematter, his eyebrows slightly bent, and with an accent of ironyand insolence impossible to be described, he replied toD'Artagnan, "I was not speaking to you, sir."

    "But I am speaking to you!" replied the young man, additionallyexasperated with this mixture of insolence and good manners, ofpoliteness and scorn.

    The stranger looked at him again with a slight smile, andretiring from the window, came out of the hostelry with a slowstep, and placed himself before the horse, within two paces ofD'Artagnan.  His quiet manner and the ironical expression of hiscountenance redoubled the mirth of the persons with whom he hadbeen talking, and who still remained at the window.D'Artagnan, seeing him approach, drew his sword a foot out of thescabbard.

    "This horse is decidedly, or rather has been in his youth, abuttercup," resumed the stranger, continuing the remarks he hadbegun, and addressing himself to his auditors at the window,without paying the least attention to the exasperation ofD'Artagnan, who, however placed himself between him and them."It is a color very well known in botany, but till the presenttime very rare among horses."

    "There are people who laugh at the horse that would not dare tolaugh at the master," cried the young emulator of the furiousTreville.

    "I do not often laugh, sir," replied the stranger, "as you mayperceive by the expression of my countenance; but nevertheless Iretain the privilege of laughing when I please."

    "And I," cried D'Artagnan, "will allow no man to laugh when itdispleases me!"

    "Indeed, sir," continued the stranger, more calm than ever;"well, that is perfectly right!" and turning on his heel, wasabout to re-enter the hostelry by the front gate, beneath whichD'Artagnan on arriving had observed a saddled horse.But, D'Artagnan was not of a character to allow a man to escapehim thus who had the insolence to ridicule him.  He drew hissword entirely from the scabbard, and followed him, crying,"Turn, turn, Master Joker, lest I strike you behind!""Strike me!" said the other, turning on his heels, and surveyingthe young man with as much astonishment as contempt.  "Why, mygood fellow, you must be mad!"  
Then, in a suppressed tone, as ifspeaking to himself, "This is annoying," continued he.  "What agodsend this would be for his Majesty, who is seeking everywherefor brave fellows to recruit for his Musketeers!"He had scarcely finished, when D'Artagnan made such a furiouslunge at him that if he had not sprung nimbly backward, it isprobable he would have jested for the last time.  The stranger,then perceiving that the matter went beyond raillery, drew hissword, saluted his adversary, and seriously placed himself onguard.  But at the same moment, his two auditors, accompanied bythe host, fell upon D'Artagnan with sticks, shovels and tongs.This caused so rapid and complete a diversion from the attackthat D'Artagnan's adversary, while the latter turned round toface this shower of blows, sheathed his sword with the sameprecision, and instead of an actor, which he had nearly been,became a spectator of the fight--a part in which he acquittedhimself with his usual impassiveness, muttering, nevertheless, "Aplague upon these Gascons!  Replace him on his orange horse, andlet him begone!"

    "Not before I have killed you, poltroon!" cried D'Artagnan,making the best face possible, and never retreating one stepbefore his three assailants, who continued to shower blows uponhim.

    "Another gasconade!" murmured the gentleman.  "By my honor, theseGascons are incorrigible!  Keep up the dance, then, since he willhave it so.  When he is tired, he will perhaps tell us that hehas had enough of it."

    But the stranger knew not the headstrong personage he had to dowith; D'Artagnan was not the man ever to cry for quarter.  Thefight was therefore prolonged for some seconds; but at lengthD'Artagnan dropped his sword, which was broken in two pieces bythe blow of a stick.  Another blow full upon his forehead at thesame moment brought him to the ground, covered with blood andalmost fainting.

    It was at this moment that people came flocking to the scene ofaction from all sides.  The host, fearful of consequences, withthe help of his servants carried the wounded man into thekitchen, where some trifling attentions were bestowed upon him.As to the gentleman, he resumed his place at the window, andsurveyed the crowd with a certain impatience, evidently annoyedby their remaining undispersed.

    "Well, how is it with this madman?" exclaimed he, turning roundas the noise of the door announced the entrance of the host, whocame in to inquire if he was unhurt.

    "Your excellency is safe and sound?" asked the host."Oh, yes!  Perfectly safe and sound, my good host; and I wish toknow what has become of our young man."

    "He is better," said the host, "he fainted quite away.""Indeed!" said the gentleman.

    "But before he fainted, he collected all his strength tochallenge you, and to defy you while challenging you.""Why, this fellow must be the devil in person!" cried thestranger.

    "Oh, no, your Excellency, he is not the devil," replied the host,with a grin of contempt; "for during his fainting we rummaged hisvalise and found nothing but a clean shirt and eleven crowns--which however, did not prevent his saying, as he was fainting,that if such a thing had happened in Paris, you should have causeto repent of it at a later period."

    "Then," said the stranger coolly, "he must be some prince indisguise."

    "I have told you this, good sir," resumed the host, "in orderthat you may be on your guard."

    "Did he name no one in his passion?"

    "Yes; he struck his pocket and said, 'We shall see what Monsieurde Treville will think of this insult offered to his protege.'""Monsieur de Treville?" said the stranger, becoming attentive,"he put his hand upon his pocket while pronouncing the name ofMonsieur de Treville?  Now, my dear host, while your young manwas insensible, you did not fail, I am quite sure, to ascertainwhat that pocket contained.  What was there in it?""A letter addressed to Monsieur de Treville, captain of theMusketeers."

    "Indeed!"

    "Exactly as I have the honor to tell your Excellency."The host, who was not endowed with great perspicacity, did notobserve the expression which his words had given to thephysiognomy of the stranger.  The latter rose from the front ofthe window, upon the sill of which he had leaned with his elbow,and knitted his brow like a man disquieted.

    "The devil!" murmured he, between his teeth.  "Can Treville haveset this Gascon upon me?  He is very young; but a sword thrust isa sword thrust, whatever be the age of him who gives it, and ayouth is less to be suspected than an older man," and thestranger fell into a reverie which lasted some minutes.  "A weakobstacle is sometimes sufficient to overthrow a great design."Host," said he, "could you not contrive to get rid of thisfrantic boy for me?  In conscience, I cannot kill him; and yet,"added he, with a coldly menacing expression, "he annoys me.Where is he?"

    "In my wife's chamber, on the first flight, where they aredressing his wounds."

    "His things and his bag are with him?  Has he taken off hisdoublet?"

    "On the contrary, everything is in the kitchen.  But if he annoysyou, this young fool--"

    "To be sure he does.  He causes a disturbance in your hostelry,which respectable people cannot put up with.  Go; make out mybill and notify my servant."

    "What, monsieur, will you leave us so soon?"

    "You know that very well, as I gave my order to saddle my horse.Have they not obeyed me?"

    "It is done; as your Excellency may have observed, your horse isin the great gateway, ready saddled for your departure.""That is well; do as I have directed you, then."

    "What the devil!" said the host to himself. "Can he be afraid ofthis boy?"  But an imperious glance from the stranger stopped himshort; he bowed humbly and retired.

    "It is not necessary for Milady* to be seen by this fellow,"continued the stranger.  "She will soon pass; she is alreadylate.  I had better get on horseback, and go and meet her.  Ishould like, however, to know what this letter addressed toTreville contains."

    *We are well aware that this term, milady, is only properly usedwhen followed by a family name.  But we find it thus in the manuscript,and we do not choose to take upon ourselves to alter it.And the stranger, muttering to himself, directed his steps towardthe kitchen."

    In the meantime, the host, who entertained no doubt that it wasthe presence of the young man that drove the stranger from hishostelry, re-ascended to his wife's chamber, and found D'Artagnanjust recovering his senses.  Giving him to understand that thepolice would deal with him pretty severely for having sought aquarrel with a great lord--for the opinion of the host thestranger could be nothing less than a great lord--he insistedthat notwithstanding his weakness D'Artagnan should get up anddepart as quickly as possible.  D'Artagnan, half stupefied,without his doublet, and with his head bound up in a linen cloth,arose then, and urged by the host, began to descend the stairs;but on arriving at the kitchen, the first thing he saw was hisantagonist talking calmly at the step of a heavy carriage, drawnby two large Norman horses.

    His interlocutor, whose head appeared through the carriagewindow, was a woman of from twenty to two-and-twenty years.  Wehave already observed with what rapidity D'Artagnan seized theexpression of a countenance.  He perceived then, at a glance,that this woman was young and beautiful; and her style of beautystruck him more forcibly from its being totally different fromthat of the southern countries in which D'Artagnan had hithertoresided.  She was pale and fair, with long curls falling inprofusion over her shoulders, had large, blue, languishing eyes,rosy lips, and hands of alabaster.  She was talking with greatanimation with the stranger.

    "His Eminence, then, orders me--" said the lady.

    "To return instantly to England, and to inform him as soon as theduke leaves London."

    "And as to my other instructions?" asked the fair traveler."They are contained in this box, which you will not open untilyou are on the other side of the Channel."

    "Very well; and you--what will you do?"

    "I--I return to Paris."

    "What, without chastising this insolent boy?" asked the lady.The stranger was about to reply; but at the moment he opened hismouth, D'Artagnan, who had heard all, precipitated himself overthe threshold of the door.

    "This insolent boy chastises others," cried he; "and I hope thatthis time he whom he ought to chastise will not escape him asbefore."

    "Will not escape him?" replied the stranger, knitting his brow."No; before a woman you would dare not fly, I presume?""Remember," said Milady, seeing the stranger lay his hand on hissword, "the least delay may ruin everything."

    "You are right," cried the gentleman; "begone then, on your part,and I will depart as quickly on mine."  And bowing to the lady,sprang into his saddle, while her coachman applied his whipvigorously to his horses.  The two interlocutors thus separated,taking opposite directions, at full gallop.

    "Pay him, booby!" cried the stranger to his servant, withoutchecking the speed of his horse; and the man, after throwing twoor three silver pieces at the foot of mine host, galloped afterhis master.

    "Base coward! false gentleman!" cried D'Artagnan, springingforward, in his turn, after the servant.  But his wound hadrendered him too weak to support such an exertion.  Scarcely hadhe gone ten steps when his ears began to tingle, a faintnessseized him, a cloud of blood passed over his eyes, and he fell inthe middle of the street, crying still, "Coward! coward! coward!""He is a coward, indeed," grumbled the host, drawing near toD'Artagnan, and endeavoring by this little flattery to make upmatters with the young man, as the heron of the fable did withthe snail he had despised the evening before.

    "Yes, a base coward," murmured D'Artagnan; "but she--she was verybeautiful."

    "What she?" demanded the host.

    "Milady," faltered D'Artagnan, and fainted a second time."Ah, it's all one," said the host; "I have lost two customers,but this one remains, of whom I am pretty certain for some daysto come.  There will be eleven crowns gained."

    It is to be remembered that eleven crowns was just the sum thatremained in D'Artagnan's purse.

    The host had reckoned upon eleven days of confinement at a crowna day, but he had reckoned without his guest.  On the followingmorning at five o'clock D'Artagnan arose, and descending to thekitchen without help, asked, among other ingredients the list ofwhich has not come down to us, for some oil, some wine, and somerosemary, and with his mother's recipe in his hand composed abalsam, with which he anointed his numerous wounds, replacing hisbandages himself, and positively refusing the assistance of anydoctor, D'Artagnan walked about that same evening, and was almostcured by the morrow.

    But when the time came to pay for his rosemary, this oil, and thewine, the only expense the master had incurred, as he hadpreserved a strict abstinence--while on the contrary, the yellowhorse, by the account of the hostler at least, had eaten threetimes as much as a horse of his size could reasonably supposed tohave done--D'Artagnan found nothing in his pocket but his littleold velvet purse with the eleven crowns it contained; for as tothe letter addressed to M. de Treville, it had disappeared.The young man commenced his search for the letter with thegreatest patience, turning out his pockets of all kinds over andover again, rummaging and rerummaging in his valise, and openingand reopening his purse; but when he found that he had come tothe conviction that the letter was not to be found, he flew, forthe third time, into such a rage as was near costing him a freshconsumption of wine, oil, and rosemary--for upon seeing this hot-headed youth become exasperated and threaten to destroyeverything in the establishment if his letter were not found, thehost seized a spit, his wife a broom handle, and the servants thesame sticks they had used the day before.

    "My letter of recommendation!" cried D'Artagnan, "my letter ofrecommendation! or, the holy blood, I will spit you all likeortolans!"

    Unfortunately, there was one circumstance which created apowerful obstacle to the accomplishment of this threat; whichwas, as we have related, that his sword had been in his firstconflict broken in two, and which he had entirely forgotten.Hence, it resulted when D'Artagnan proceeded to draw his sword inearnest, he found himself purely and simply armed with a stump ofa sword about eight or ten inches in length, which the host hadcarefully placed in the scabbard.  As to the rest of the blade,the master had slyly put that on one side to make himself alarding pin.

    But this deception would probably not have stopped our fieryyoung man if the host had not reflected that the reclamationwhich his guest made was perfectly just.

    "But, after all," said he, lowering the point of his spit, "whereis this letter?"

    "Yes, where is this letter?" cried D'Artagnan.  "In the firstplace, I warn you that that letter is for Monsieur de Treville,and it must be found, he will not know how to find it."His threat completed the intimidation of the host.  After theking and the cardinal, M. de Treville was the man whose name wasperhaps most frequently repeated by the military, and even bycitizens.  There was, to be sure, Father Joseph, but his name wasnever pronounced but with a subdued voice, such was the terrorinspired by his Gray Eminence, as the cardinal's familiar wascalled.

    Throwing down his spit, and ordering his wife to do the same withher broom handle, and the servants with their sticks, he set thefirst example of commencing an earnest search for the lostletter.

    "Does the letter contain anything valuable?" demanded the host,after a few minutes of useless investigation.

    "Zounds! I think it does indeed!" cried the Gascon, who reckonedupon this letter for making his way at court.  "It contained myfortune!"

    "Bills upon Spain?" asked the disturbed host.

    "Bills upon his Majesty's private treasury," answered D'Artagnan,who, reckoning upon entering into the king's service inconsequence of this recommendation, believed he could make thissomewhat hazardous reply without telling of a falsehood."The devil!" cried the host, at his wit's end.

    "But it's of no importance," continued D'Artagnan, with naturalassurance; "it's of no importance.  The money is nothing; thatletter was everything.  I would rather have lost a thousandpistoles than have lost it."  He would not have risked more if hehad said twenty thousand; but a certain juvenile modestyrestrained him.

    A ray of light all at once broke upon the mind of the host as hewas giving himself to the devil upon finding nothing."That letter is not lost!" cried he.

    "What!" cried D'Artagnan.

    "No, it has been stolen from you."

    "Stolen? By whom?"

    "By the gentleman who was here yesterday.  He came down into thekitchen, where your doublet was.  He remained there some timealone.  I would lay a wager he has stolen it."

    "Do you think so?" answered D'Artagnan, but little convinced, ashe knew better than anyone else how entirely personal the valueof this letter was, and was nothing in it likely to temptcupidity.  The fact was that none of his servants, none of thetravelers present, could have gained anything by being possessedof this paper.

    "Do you say," resumed D'Artagnan, "that you suspect thatimpertinent gentleman?"

    "I tell you I am sure of it," continued the host.  "When Iinformed him that your lordship was the protege of Monsieur deTreville, and that you even had a letter for that illustriousgentleman, he appeared to be very much disturbed, and asked mewhere that letter was, and immediately came down into thekitchen, where he knew your doublet was."

    "Then that's my thief," replied D'Artagnan.  "I will complain toMonsieur de Treville, and Monsieur de Treville will complain tothe king."  He then drew two crowns majestically from his purseand gave them to the host, who accompanied him, cap in hand, tothe gate, and remounted his yellow horse, which bore him withoutany further accident to the gate of St. Antoine at Paris, wherehis owner sold him for three crowns, which was a very good price,considering that D'Artagnan had ridden him hard during the laststage.  Thus the dealer to whom D'Artagnan sold him for the ninelivres did not conceal from the young man that he only gave thatenormous sum for him on the account of the originality of hiscolor.

    Thus D'Artagnan entered Paris on foot, carrying his little packetunder his arm, and walked about till he found an apartment to belet on terms suited to the scantiness of his means.  This chamberwas a sort of  garret, situated in the Rue des Fossoyeurs, nearthe Luxembourg.

    As soon as the earnest money was paid, D'Artagnan took possessionof his lodging, and passed the remainder of the day in sewingonto his doublet and hose some ornamental braiding which hismother had taken off an almost-new doublet of the elder M.D'Artagnan, and which she had given her son secretly.  Next hewent to the Quai de Feraille to have a new blade put to hissword, and then returned toward the Louvre, inquiring of thefirst Musketeer he met for the situation of the hotel of M. deTreville, which proved to be in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier; thatis to say, in the immediate vicinity of the chamber hired byD'Artagnan--a circumstance which appeared to furnish a happyaugury for the success of his journey.

    After this, satisfied with the way in which he had conductedhimself at Meung, without remorse for the past, confident in thepresent, and full of hope for the future, he retired to bed andslept the sleep of the brave.

    This sleep, provincial as it was, brought him to nine o'clock inthe morning; at which hour he rose, in order to repair to theresidence of M. de Treville, the third personage in the kingdompaternal estimation.

    2  THE ANTECHAMBER OF M. DE TREVILLE

    M. de Troisville, as his family was still called in Gascony, orM. de Treville, as he has ended by styling himself in Paris, hadreally commenced life as D'Artagnan now did; that is to say,without a sou in his pocket, but with a fund of audacity,shrewdness, and intelligence which makes the poorest Gascongentleman often derive more in his hope from the paternalinheritance than the richest Perigordian or Berrichan gentlemanderives in reality from his.  His insolent bravery, his stillmore insolent success at a time when blows poured down like hail,had borne him to the top of that difficult ladder called CourtFavor, which he had climbed four steps at a time.He was the friend of the king, who honored highly, as everyoneknows, the memory of his father, Henry IV.  
The father of M. deTreville had served him so faithfully in his wars against  theleague that in default of money--a thing to which the Bearnaiswas accustomed all his life, and who constantly paid his debtswith that of which he never stood in need of borrowing, that isto say, with ready wit--in default of money, we repeat, heauthorized him, after the reduction of Paris, to assume for hisarms a golden lion passant upon gules, with the motto Fidelis etfortis.  This was a great matter in the way of honor, but verylittle in the way of wealth; so that when the illustriouscompanion of the great Henry died, the only inheritance he wasable to leave his son was his sword and his motto.  Thanks tothis double gift and the spotless name that accompanied it, M. deTreville was admitted into the household of the young princewhere he made such good use of his sword, and was so faithful tohis motto, that Louis XIII, one of the good blades of hiskingdom, was accustomed to say that if he had a friend who wasabout to fight, he would advise him to choose as a second,himself first, and Treville next--or even, perhaps, beforehimself.

    Thus Louis XIII had a real liking for Treville--a royal liking, aself-interested liking, it is true, but still a liking.  At thatunhappy period it was an important consideration to be surroundedby such men as Treville.  Many might take for their device theepithet STRONG, which formed the second part of his motto, butvery few gentlemen could lay claim to the FAITHFUL, whichconstituted the first.  Treville was one of these latter.  Hiswas one of those rare organizations, endowed with an obedientintelligence like that of  the dog; with a blind valor, a quickeye, and a prompt hand; to whom sight appeared only to be givento see if the king were dissatisfied with anyone, and the hand tostrike this displeasing personage, whether a Besme, a Maurevers,a Poltiot de Mere, or a Vitry.  In short, up to this periodnothing had been wanting to Treville but opportunity; but he wasever on the watch for it, and he faithfully promised himself thathe would not fail to seize it by its three hairs whenever it camewithin reach of his hand.  At last Louis XIII made Treville thecaptain of his Musketeers, who were to Louis XIII in devotedness,or rather in fanaticism, what his Ordinaries had been to HenryIII, and his Scotch Guard to Louis XI.

    On his part, the cardinal was not behind the king in thisrespect.  When he saw the formidable and chosen body with whichLouis XIII had surrounded himself, this second, or rather thisfirst king of France, became desirous that he, too, should havehis guard.  He had his Musketeers therefore, as Louis XIII hadhis, and these two powerful rivals vied with each other inprocuring, not only from all the provinces of France, but evenfrom all foreign states, the most celebrated swordsmen.  It wasnot uncommon for Richelieu and Louis XIII to dispute over theirevening game of chess upon the merits of their servants.  Eachboasted the bearing and the courage of his own people.  Whileexclaiming loudly against duels and brawls, they excited themsecretly to quarrel, deriving an immoderate satisfaction orgenuine regret from the success or defeat of their owncombatants.  We learn this from the memoirs of a man who wasconcerned in some few of these defeats and in many of thesevictories.

    Treville had grasped the weak side of his master; and it was tothis address that he owed the long and constant favor of a kingwho has not left the reputation behind him of being very faithfulin his friendships.  He paraded his Musketeers before theCardinal Armand Duplessis with an insolent air which made thegray moustache of his Eminence curl with ire.  Trevilleunderstood admirably the war method of that period, in which hewho could not live at the expense of the enemy must live at theexpense of his compatriots.  His soldiers formed a legion ofdevil-may-care fellows, perfectly undisciplined toward all buthimself.

    Loose, half-drunk, imposing, the king's Musketeers, or rather M.de Treville's, spread themselves about in the cabarets, in thepublic walks, and the public sports, shouting, twisting theirmustaches, clanking their swords, and taking great pleasure inannoying the Guards of the cardinal whenever they could fall inwith them; then drawing in the open streets, as if it were thebest of all possible sports; sometimes killed, but sure in thatcase to be both wept and avenged; often killing others, but thencertain of not rotting in prison, M. de Treville being there toclaim them.  Thus M. de Treville was praised to the highest noteby these men, who adored him, and who, ruffians as they were,trembled before him like scholars before their master, obedientto his least word, and ready to sacrifice themselves to wash outthe smallest insult.

    M. de Treville employed this powerful weapon for the king, in thefirst place, and the friends of the king--and then for himselfand his own friends.  For the rest, in the memoirs of thisperiod, which has left so many memoirs, one does not find thisworthy gentleman blamed even by his enemies; and he had many suchamong men of the pen as well as among men of the sword.  In noinstance, let us say, was this worthy gentleman accused ofderiving personal advantage from the cooperation of his minions.Endowed with a rare genius for intrigue which rendered him theequal of the ablest intriguers, he remained an honest man.  Stillfurther, in spite of sword thrusts which weaken, and painfulexercises which fatigue, he had become one of the most gallantfrequenters of revels, one of the most insinuating lady's men,one of the softest whisperers of interesting  nothings of hisday; the BONNES FORTUNES of De Treville were talked of as thoseof M. de Bassompierre had been talked of twenty years before, andthat was not saying a little.  The captain of the Musketeers wastherefore admired, feared, and loved; and this constitutes thezenith of human fortune.

    Louis XIV absorbed all the smaller stars of his court in his ownvast radiance; but his father, a sun PLURIBUS IMPAR, left hispersonal splendor to each of his favorites, his individual valueto each of his courtiers.  In addition to the leeves of the kingand the cardinal, there might be reckoned in Paris at that timemore than two hundred smaller but still noteworthy leeves.  Amongthese two hundred leeves, that of Treville was one of the mostsought.

    The court of his hotel, situated in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier,resembled a camp from by six o'clock in the morning in summer andeight o'clock in winter.  From fifty to sixty Musketeers, whoappeared to replace one another in order always to present animposing number, paraded constantly, armed to the teeth and readyfor anything.  On one of those immense staircases, upon whosespace modern civilization would build a whole house. Ascended anddescended the office seekers of Paris, who ran after any sort offavor--gentlemen from the provinces anxious to be enrolled, andservants in all sorts of liveries, bringing and carrying messagesbetween their masters and M. de Treville.  In the antechamber,upon long circular benches, reposed the elect; that is to say,those who were called.  In this apartment a continued buzzingprevailed from morning till night, while M. de Treville, in hisoffice contiguous to this antechamber, received visits, listenedto complaints, gave his orders, and like the king in his balconyat the Louvre, had only to place himself at the window to reviewboth his men and arms.

    The day on which D'Artagnan presented himself the assemblage wasimposing, particularly for a provincial just arriving  from hisprovince.  It is true that this provincial was a Gascon; andthat, particularly at this period, the compatriots of D'Artagnanhad the reputation of not being easily intimidated.  When he hadonce passed the massive door covered with long square-headednails, he fell into the midst of a troop of swordsmen, whocrossed one another in their passage, calling out, quarreling,and playing tricks one with another.  In order to make one's wayamid these turbulent and conflicting waves, it was necessary tobe an officer, a great noble, or a pretty woman.

    It was, then, into the midst of this tumult and disorder that ouryoung man advanced with a beating heat, ranging his long rapierup his lanky leg, and keeping one hand on the edge of his cap,with that half-smile of the embarrassed a provincial who wishesto put on a good face.  When he had passed one group he began tobreathe more freely; but he could not help observing that theyturned round to look at him, and for the first time in his lifeD'Artagnan, who had till that day entertained a very good opinionof himself, felt ridiculous.

    Arrived at the staircase, it was still worse.  There were fourMusketeers on the bottom steps, amusing themselves with thefollowing exercise, while ten or twelve of their comrades waitedupon the landing place to take their turn in the sport.One of them, stationed upon the top stair, naked sword in hand,prevented, or at least endeavored to prevent, the three othersfrom ascending.

    These three others fenced against him with their agile swords.D'Artagnan at first took these weapons for foils, and believedthem to be buttoned; but he soon perceived by certain scratchesthat every weapon was pointed and sharpened, and that at each ofthese scratches not only the spectators, but even the actorsthemselves, laughed like so many madmen.

    He who at the moment occupied the upper step kept his adversariesmarvelously in check.  A circle was formed around them.  Theconditions required that at every hit the man touched should quitthe game, yielding his turn for the benefit of the adversary whohad hit him.  In five minutes three were slightly wounded, one onthe hand, another on the ear, by the defender of the stair, whohimself remained intact--a piece of skill which was worth to him,according to the rules agreed upon, three turns of favor,However difficult it might be, or rather as he pretended it was,to astonish our young traveler, this pastime really astonishedhim.  He had seen in his province--that land in which headsbecome so easily heated--a few of the preliminaries of duels; butthe daring of these four fencers appeared to him the strongest hehad ever heard of even in Gascony.  He believed himselftransported into that famous country of giants into whichGulliver afterward went and was so frightened; and yet he had notgained the goal, for there were still the landing place and theantechamber.

    On the landing they were no longer fighting, but amusedthemselves with stories about women, and in the antechamber, withstories about the court.  On the landing D'Artagnan blushed; inthe antechamber he trembled.  His warm and fickle imagination,which in Gascony had rendered formidable to young chambermaids,and even sometimes their mistresses, had never dreamed, even inmoments of delirium, of half the amorous wonders or a quarter ofthe feats of gallantry which were here set forth in connectionwith names the best known and with details the least concealed.But if his morals were shocked on the landing, his respect forthe cardinal was scandalized in the antechamber.  There, to hisgreat astonishment, D'Artagnan heard the policy which made allEurope tremble criticized aloud and openly, as well as theprivate life of the cardinal, which so many great nobles had beenpunished for trying to pry into.  That great man who was sorevered by D'Artagnan the elder served as an object of ridiculeto the Musketeers of Treville, who cracked their jokes upon hisbandy legs and his crooked back.  Some sang ballads about Mme.d'Aguillon, his mistress, and Mme. Cambalet, his niece; whileothers formed parties and plans to annoy the pages and guards ofthe cardinal duke--all things which appeared to D'Artagnanmonstrous impossibilities.

    Nevertheless,  when the name of the king was now and then utteredunthinkingly amid all these cardinal jests, a sort of gag seemedto close for a moment on all these jeering mouths.  They lookedhesitatingly around them, and appeared to doubt the thickness ofthe partition between them and the office of M. de Treville; buta fresh allusion soon brought back the conversation to hisEminence, and then the laughter recovered its loudness and thelight was not withheld from any of his actions.

    "Certes, these fellows will all either be imprisoned or hanged,"thought the terrified D'Artagnan, "and I, no doubt, with them;for from the moment I have either listened to or heard them, Ishall be held as an accomplice.  What would my good father say,who so strongly pointed out to me the respect due to thecardinal, if he knew I was in the society of such pagans?"We have no need, therefore, to say that D'Artagnan dared not joinin the conversation, only he looked with all his eyes andlistened with all his ears, stretching his five senses so as tolose nothing; and despite his confidence on the paternaladmonitions, he felt himself carried by his tastes and led by hisinstincts to praise rather than to blame the unheard-of  thingswhich were taking place.

    Although he was a perfect stranger in the court of M. deTreville's courtiers, and this his first appearance in thatplace, he was at length noticed, and somebody came and asked himwhat he wanted.  At this demand D'Artagnan gave his name verymodestly, emphasized the title of compatriot, and begged theservant who had put the question to him to request a moment'saudience of M. de Treville--a request which the other, with anair of protection, promised to transmit in due season.D'Artagnan, a little recovered from his first surprise, had nowleisure to study costumes and physiognomy.

    The center of the most animated group was a Musketeer of greatheight and haughty countenance, dressed in a costume so peculiaras to attract general attention.  He did not wear the uniformcloak--which was not obligatory at that epoch of less liberty butmore independence--but a cerulean-blue doublet, a little faded andworn, and over this a magnificent baldric, worked in gold, whichshone like water ripples in the sun.  A long cloak of crimsonvelvet fell in graceful folds from his shoulders, disclosing infront the splendid baldric, from which was suspended a giganticrapier. This Musketeer had just come off guard, complained ofhaving a cold, and coughed from time to time affectedly.  It wasfor this reason, as he said to those around him, that he had puton his cloak; and while he spoke with a lofty air and twisted hismustache disdainfully, all admired his embroidered baldric, andD'Artagnan more than anyone.

    "What would you have?" said the Musketeer.  "This fashion iscoming in.  It is a folly, I admit, but still it is the fashion.Besides, one must lay out one's inheritance somehow.""Ah, Porthos!" cried one of his companions, "don't try to make usbelieve you obtained that baldric by paternal generosity.  It wasgiven to you by that veiled lady I met you with the other Sunday,near the gate St. Honor?"

    "No, upon honor and by the faith of a gentleman, I bought it withthe contents of my own purse," answered he whom they designatedby the name Porthos.

    "Yes; about in the same manner," said another Musketeer, "that Ibought this new purse with what my mistress put into the oldone."

    "It's true, though," said Porthos; "and the proof is that I paidtwelve pistoles for it."

    The wonder was increased, though the doubt continued to exist."Is it not true, Aramis?" said Porthos, turning toward anotherMusketeer.

    This other Musketeer formed a perfect contrast to hisinterrogator, who had just designated him by the name of Aramis.He was a stout man, of about two- or three-and-twenty, with anopen, ingenuous countenance, a black, mild eye, and cheeks rosyand downy as an autumn peach.  His delicate mustache marked aperfectly straight line upon his upper lip; he appeared to dreadto lower his hands lest their veins should swell, and he pinchedthe tips of his ears from time to time to preserve their delicatepink transparency.  Habitually he spoke little and slowly, bowedfrequently, laughed without noise, showing his teeth, which werefine and of which, as the rest of his person, he appeared to takegreat care.  He answered the appeal of his friend by anaffirmative nod of the head.

    This affirmation appeared to dispel all doubts with regard to thebaldric.  They continued to admire it, but said no more about it;and with a rapid change of thought, the conversation passedsuddenly to another subject.

    "What do you think of the story Chalais's esquire relates?" askedanother Musketeer, without addressing anyone in particular, buton the contrary speaking to everybody.

    "And what does he say?" asked Porthos, in a self-sufficient tone."He relates that he met at Brussels Rochefort, the AME DAMNEE ofthe cardinal disguised as a Capuchin, and that this cursedRochefort, thanks to his disguise, had tricked Monsieur deLaigues, like a ninny as he is."

    "A ninny, indeed!" said Porthos; "but is the matter certain?""I had it from Aramis," replied the Musketeer.

    "Indeed?"

    "Why, you knew it, Porthos," said Aramis.  "I told you of ityesterday.  Let us say no more about it."

    "Say no more about it?  That's YOUR opinion!" replied Porthos."Say no more about it!  PESTE!  You come to your conclusionsquickly.  What!  The cardinal sets a spy upon a gentleman, hashis letters stolen from him by means of a traitor, a brigand, arascal-has, with the help of this spy and thanks to thiscorrespondence, Chalais's throat cut, under the stupid pretextthat he wanted to kill the king and marry Monsieur to the queen!Nobody knew a word of this enigma.  You unraveled it yesterday tothe great satisfaction of all; and while we are still gaping withwonder at the news, you come and tell us today, "Let us say nomore about it.'"

    "Well, then, let us talk about it, since you desire it," repliedAramis, patiently.

    "This Rochefort," cried Porthos, "if I were the esquire of poorChalais, should pass a minute or two very uncomfortably with me.""And you--you would pass rather a sad quarter-hour with the RedDuke," replied Aramis.

    "Oh, the Red Duke!  Bravo!  Bravo!  The Red Duke!" cried Porthos,clapping his hands and nodding his head.  "The Red Duke iscapital.  I'll circulate that saying, be assured, my dear fellow.Who says this Aramis is not a wit?  What a misfortune it is youdid not follow your first vocation; what a delicious abbe youwould have made!"

    "Oh, it's only a temporary postponement," replied Aramis; "Ishall be one someday.  You very well know, Porthos, that Icontinue to study theology for that purpose."

    "He will be one, as he says," cried Porthos; "he will be one,sooner or later."

    "Sooner." said Aramis.

    "He only waits for one thing to determine him to resume hiscassock, which hangs behind his uniform," said another Musketeer."What is he waiting for?" asked another.

    "Only till the queen has given an heir to the crown of France.""No jesting upon that subject, gentlemen," said Porthos; "thankGod the queen is still of an age to give one!"

    "They say that Monsieur de Buckingham is in France," repliedAramis, with a significant smile which gave to this sentence,apparently so simple, a tolerably scandalous meaning."Aramis, my good friend, this time you are wrong," interruptedPorthos.  "Your wit is always leading you beyond bounds; ifMonsieur de Treville heard you, you would repent of speakingthus."

    "Are you going to give me a lesson, Porthos?" cried Aramis, fromwhose usually mild eye a flash passed like lightning."My dear fellow, be a Musketeer or an abbe.  Be one or the other,but not both,"  replied Porthos.  "You know what Athos told youthe other day; you eat at everybody's mess.  Ah, don't be angry,I beg of you, that would be useless; you know what is agreed uponbetween you, Athos and me.  You go to Madame d'Aguillon's, andyou pay your court to her; you go to Madame de Bois-Tracy's, thecousin of Madame de Chevreuse, and you pass for being faradvanced in the good graces of that lady.  Oh, good Lord!  Don'ttrouble yourself to reveal your good luck; no one asks for yoursecret-all the world knows your discretion.  But since you possessthat virtue, why the devil don't you make use of it with respectto her Majesty?  Let whoever likes talk of the king and thecardinal, and how he likes; but the queen is sacred, and ifanyone speaks of her, let it be respectfully."

    "Porthos, you are as vain as Narcissus; I plainly tell you so,"replied Aramis.  "You know I hate moralizing, except when it isdone by Athos.  As to you, good sir, you wear too magnificent abaldric to be strong on that head.  I will be an abbe if it suitsme.  In the meanwhile I am a Musketeer; in that quality I saywhat I please, and at this moment it pleases me to say that youweary me."

    "Aramis!"

    "Porthos!"

    "Gentlemen! Gentlemen!" cried the surrounding group."Monsieur de Treville awaits Monsieur d'Artagnan," cried aservant, throwing open the door of the cabinet.

    At this announcement, during which the door remained open,everyone became mute, and amid the general silence the young mancrossed part of the length of the antechamber, and entered theapartment of the captain of the Musketeers, congratulatinghimself with all his heart at having so narrowly escaped the endof this strange quarrel.

    3  THE AUDIENCE

    M. de Treville was at the moment in rather ill-humor,nevertheless he saluted the young man politely, who bowed to thevery ground; and he smiled on receiving D'Artagnan's response,the Bearnese accent of which recalled to him at the same timehis youth and his country--a double remembrance which makes a mansmile at all ages; but stepping toward the antechamber and makinga sign to D'Artagnan with his hand, as if to ask his permissionto finish with others before he began with him, he called threetimes, with a louder voice at each time, so that he ran throughthe intervening tones between the imperative accent and the angryaccent.

    "Athos!  Porthos!  Aramis!"

    The two Musketeers with whom we have already made acquaintance,and who answered to the last of these three names, immediatelyquitted the group of which they had formed a part, and advancedtoward the cabinet, the door of which closed after them as soonas they had entered.  Their appearance, although it was not quiteat ease, excited by its carelessness, at once full of dignity andsubmission, the admiration of D'Artagnan, who beheld in these twomen demigods, and in their leader an Olympian Jupiter, armed withall his thunders.

    When the two Musketeers had entered; when the door was closedbehind them; when the buzzing murmur of the antechamber, to whichthe summons which had been made had doubtless furnished freshfood, had recommenced; when M. de Treville had three or fourtimes paced in silence, and with a frowning brow, the wholelength of his cabinet, passing each time before Porthos andAramis, who were as upright and silent as if on parade--hestopped all at once full in front of them, and covering them fromhead to foot with an angry look, "Do you know what the king saidto me," cried he, "and that no longer ago then yesterdayevening--do you know, gentlemen?"

    "No," replied the two Musketeers, after a moment's silence, "no,sir, we do not."

    "But I hope that you will do us the honor to tell us," addedAramis, in his politest tone and with his most graceful bow."He told me that he should henceforth recruit his Musketeers fromamong the Guards of Monsieur the Cardinal."

    "The Guards of the cardinal! And why so?" asked Porthos, warmly."Because he plainly perceives that his piquette* stands in needof being enlivened by a mixture of good wine."

    *A watered liquor, made from the second pressing of the grape.The two Musketeers reddened to the whites of their eyes.D'Artagnan did not know where he was, and wished himself ahundred feet underground.

    "Yes, yes," continued M. de Treville, growing warmer as he spoke,"and his majesty was right; for, upon my honor, it is true thatthe Musketeers make but a miserable figure at court.  Thecardinal related yesterday while playing with the king, with anair of condolence very displeasing to me, that the day beforeyesterday those DAMNED MUSKETEERS, those DAREDEVILS--he dweltupon those words with an ironical tone still more displeasing tome--those BRAGGARTS, added he, glancing at me with his tiger-cat's eye, had made a riot in the Rue Ferou in a cabaret, andthat a party of his Guards (I thought he was going to laugh in myface) had been forced to arrest the rioters!  MORBLEU!  You mustknow something about it.  Arrest Musketeers!  You were amongthem--you were!  Don't deny it; you were recognized, and thecardinal named you.  But it's all my fault; yes, it's all myfault, because it is myself who selects my men.  You, Aramis, whythe devil did you ask me for a uniform when you would have beenso much better in a cassock?  And you, Porthos, do you only wearsuch a fine golden baldric to suspend a sword of straw from it?And Athos--I don't see Athos.  Where is he?"

    "Ill--very ill, say you? And of what malady?"

    "It is feared that it may be the smallpox, sir," replied Porthos,desirous of taking his turn in the conversation; "and what isserious is that it will certainly spoil his face.""The smallpox!  That's a great story to tell me, Porthos!  Sickof the smallpox at his age!  No, no; but wounded without doubt,killed, perhaps.  Ah, if I knew! S'blood!  Messieurs Musketeers,I will not have this haunting of bad places, this quarreling inthe streets, this swordplay at the crossways; and above all, Iwill not have occasion given for the cardinal's Guards, who arebrave,  quiet, skillful men who never put themselves in aposition to be arrested, and who, besides, never allow themselvesto be arrested, to laugh at you!  I am sure of it--they wouldprefer dying on the spot to being arrested or taking back a step.To save yourselves, to scamper away, to flee--that is good forthe king's Musketeers!"

    Porthos and Aramis trembled with rage.  They could willingly havestrangled M. de Treville, if, at the bottom of all this, they hadnot felt it was the great love he bore them which made him speakthus.  They stamped upon the carpet with their feet; they bittheir lips till the blood came, and grasped the hilts of theirswords with all their might.  All without had heard, as we havesaid, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis called, and had guessed, from M.de Treville's tone of voice, that he was very angry aboutsomething.  Ten curious heads were glued to the tapestry andbecame pale with fury; for their ears, closely applied to thedoor, did not lose a syllable of what he said, while their mouthsrepeated as he went on, the insulting expressions  of the captainto all the people in the antechamber.  In an instant, from thedoor of the cabinet to the street gate, the whole hotel wasboiling.

    "Ah! The king's Musketeers are arrested by the Guards of thecardinal, are they?" continued M. de Treville, as furious atheart as his soldiers, but emphasizing his words and plungingthem, one by one, so to say, like so many blows of a stiletto,into the bosoms of his auditors.  "What! Six of his Eminence'sGuards arrest six of his Majesty's Musketeers! MORBLEU!  My partis taken!  I will go straight to the louvre; I will give in myresignation as captain of the king's Musketeers to take alieutenancy in the cardinal's Guards, and if he refuses me,MORBLEU!  I will turn abbe."

    At these words, the murmur without became an explosion; nothingwas to be heard but oaths and blasphemies.  The MORBLUES, theSANG DIEUS, the MORTS TOUTS LES DIABLES, crossed one another inthe air.  D'Artagnan looked for some tapestry behind which hemight hide himself, and felt an immense inclination to crawlunder the table.

    "Well, my Captain," said Porthos, quite beside himself, "thetruth is that we were six against six.  But we were not capturedby fair means; and before we had time to draw our swords, two ofour party were dead, and Athos, grievously wounded, was verylittle better.  For you know Athos.  Well, Captain, he endeavoredtwice to get up, and fell again twice.  And we did notsurrender--no!  They dragged us away by force.  On the way weescaped.  As

    for Athos, they believed him to be dead, and left him very quieton the field of battle, not thinking it worth the trouble tocarry him away.  That's the whole story.  What the devil,Captain, one cannot win all one's battles!  The great Pompey lostthat of Pharsalia; and Francis the First, who was, as I haveheard say, as good as other folks, nevertheless lost the Battleof Pavia."

    "And I have the honor of assuring you that I killed one of themwith his own sword," said Aramis; "for mine was broken at thefirst parry.  Killed him, or poniarded him, sir, as is mostagreeable to you."

    "I did not know that," replied M. de Treville, in a somewhatsoftened tone.  "The cardinal exaggerated, as I perceive.""But pray, sir," continued Aramis, who, seeing his captain becomeappeased, ventured to risk a prayer, "do not say that Athos iswounded.  He would be in despair if that should come to the earsof the king; and as the wound is very serious, seeing that aftercrossing the shoulder it penetrates into the chest, it is to be feared--"At this instant the tapestry was raised and a noble and handsomehead, but frightfully pale, appeared under the fringe."Athos!" cried the two Musketeers.

    "Athos!" repeated M. de Treville himself.

    "You have sent for me, sir," said Athos to M. de Treville, in afeeble yet perfectly calm voice, "you have sent for me, as mycomrades inform me, and I have hastened to receive your orders.I am here; what do you want with me?"

    And at these words, the Musketeer, in irreproachable costume,belted as usual, with a tolerably firm step, entered the cabinet.M. de Treville, moved to the bottom of his heart by this proof ofcourage, sprang toward him.

    "I was about to say to these gentlemen," added he, "that I forbidmy Musketeers to expose their lives needlessly; for brave men arevery dear to the king, and the king knows that his Musketeers arethe bravest on the earth.  Your hand, Athos!"

    And without waiting for the answer of the newcomer to this proofof affection, M. de Treville seized his right hand and pressed itwith all his might, without perceiving that Athos, whatever mightbe his self-command, allowed a slight murmur of pain to escapehim, and if possible, grew paler than he was before.The door had remained open, so strong was the excitement producedby the arrival of Athos, whose wound, though kept as a secret,was known to all.  A burst of satisfaction hailed the last wordsof the captain; and two or three heads, carried away by theenthusiasm of the moment, appeared through the openings of thetapestry.  M. de Treville was about to reprehend this breach ofthe rules of etiquette, when he felt the hand of Athos, who hadrallied all his energies to contend against pain, at lengthovercome by it, fell upon the floor as if he were dead."A surgeon!" cried M. de Treville, "mine! The king's! The best! Asurgeon! Or, s'blood, my brave Athos will die!"

    At the cries of M. de Treville, the whole assemblage rushed intothe cabinet, he not thinking to shut the door against anyone, andall crowded round the wounded man.  But all this eager attentionmight have been useless if the doctor was so loudly called forhad chanced to be in the hotel.  He pushed through the crowd,approached Athos, still insensible, and as all this noise andcommotion inconvenienced him greatly, he required, as the firstand most urgent thing, that the Musketeer should be carried intoan adjoining chamber.  Immediately M. de Treville opened andpointed the way to Porthos and Aramis, who bore their comrade intheir arms.  Behind this group walked the surgeon; and behind thesurgeon the door closed.

    The cabinet of M. de Treville, generally held so sacred, becamein an instant the annex of the antechamber.  Everyone spoke,harangued, and vociferated, swearing, cursing, and consigning thecardinal and his Guards to all the devils.

    An instant after, Porthos and Aramis re-entered, the surgeon andM. de Treville alone remaining with the wounded.

    At length, M. de Treville himself returned.  The injured man hadrecovered his senses.  The surgeon declared that the situation ofthe Musketeer had nothing in it to render his friends uneasy, hisweakness having been purely and simply caused by loss of blood.Then M. de Treville made a sign with his hand, and all retiredexcept D'Artagnan, who did not forget that he had an audience,and with the tenacity of a Gascon remained in his place.When all had gone out and the door was closed, M. de Treville, onturning round, found himself alone with the young man.  The eventwhich had occurred had in some degree broken the thread of hisideas.  He inquired what was the will of his persevering visitor.D'Artagnan then repeated his name, and in an instant recoveringall his remembrances of the present and the past, M. de Trevillegrasped the situation.

    "Pardon me," said he, smiling, "pardon me my dear compatriot, butI had wholly forgotten you.  But what help is there for it!  Acaptain is nothing but a father of a family, charged with even agreater responsibility than the father of an ordinary family.Soldiers are big children; but as I maintain that the orders ofthe king, and more particularly the orders of the cardinal,should be executed--"

    D'Artagnan could not restrain a smile.  By this smile M. deTreville judged that he had not to deal with a fool, and changingthe conversation, came straight to the point.

    "I respected your father very much," said he.  "What can I do forthe son?  Tell me quickly; my time is not my own.""Monsieur," said D'Artagnan, "on quitting Tarbes and cominghither, it was my intention to request of you, in remembrance ofthe friendship which you have not forgotten, the uniform of aMusketeer; but after all that I have seen during the last twohours, I comprehend that such a favor is enormous, and tremblelest I should not merit it."

    "It is indeed a favor, young man," replied M. de Treville, "butit may not be so far beyond your hopes as you believe, or ratheras you appear to believe.  But his majesty's decision is alwaysnecessary; and I inform you with regret that no one becomes aMusketeer without the preliminary ordeal of several campaigns,certain brilliant actions, or a service of two years in someother regiment less favored than ours."

    D'Artagnan bowed without replying, feeling his desire to don theMusketeer's uniform vastly increased by the great difficultieswhich preceded the attainment of it.

    "But," continued M. de Treville, fixing upon his compatriot alook so piercing that it might be said he wished to read thethoughts of his heart, "on account of my old companion, yourfather, as I have said, I will do something for you, young man.Our recruits from Bearn are not generally very rich, and I haveno reason to think matters have much changed in this respectsince I left the province.  I dare say you have not brought toolarge a stock of money with you?"

    D'Artagnan drew himself up with a proud air which plainly said,"I ask alms of no man."

    "Oh, that's very well, young man," continued M. de Treville,"that's all very well.  I know these airs; I myself came to Pariswith four crowns in my purse, and would have fought with anyonewho dared to tell me I was not in a condition to purchase theLouvre."

    D'Artagnan's bearing became still more imposing.  Thanks to thesale of his horse, he commenced his career with four more crownsthan M. de Treville possessed at the commencement of his."You ought, I say, then, to husband the means you have, howeverlarge the sum may be; but you ought also to endeavor to perfectyourself in the exercises becoming a gentleman.  I will write aletter today to the Director of the Royal Academy, and tomorrowhe will admit you without any expense to yourself.  Do not refusethis little service.  Our best-born and richest gentlemensometimes solicit it without being able to obtain it.  You willlearn horsemanship, swordsmanship in all its branches, anddancing.  You will make some desirable acquaintances; and fromtime to time you can call upon me to tell you how you are gettingon and to say whether I can be of further service to you."D'Artagnan, stranger as he was to all the manners of a court,could not but perceive a little coldness in this reception."Alas, sir," said he, "I cannot but perceive how sadly I miss theletter of introduction which my father gave me to present toyou."

    "I certainly am surprised," replied M. de Treville, "that youshould undertake so long a journey without that necessarypassport, the sole resource of us poor Bearnese.""I had one, sir, and, thank God, such as I could wish," criedD'Artagnan; "but it was perfidiously stolen from me."He then related the adventure of Meung, described the unknowngentleman with the greatest minuteness, and all with a warmth andtruthfulness that delighted M. de Treville.

    "This is all very strange," said M. de Treville, after meditatinga minute; "you mentioned my name, then, aloud?"

    "Yes, sir, I certainly committed that imprudence; but why shouldI have done otherwise?  A name like yours must be as a buckler tome on my way.  Judge if I should not put myself under itsprotection."

    Flattery was at that period very current, and M. de Trevilleloved incense as well as a king, or even a cardinal.  He couldnot refrain from a smile of visible satisfaction; but this smilesoon disappeared, and returning to the adventure of Meung, "Tellme," continued he, "had not this gentlemen a slight scar on hischeek?"

    "Yes, such a one as would be made by the grazing of a ball.""Was he not a fine-looking man?"

    "Yes."

    "Of lofty stature."

    "Yes."

    "Of complexion and brown hair?"

    "Yes, yes, that is he; how is it, sir, that you are acquaintedwith this man?  If I ever find him again--and I will find him, Iswear, were it in hell!"

    "He was waiting for a woman," continued Treville."He departed immediately after having conversed for a minute withher whom he awaited."

    "You know not the subject of their conversation?""He gave her a box, told her not to open it except in London.""Was this woman English?"

    "He called her Milady."

    "It is he; it must be he!"  murmured Treville.  "I believed himstill at Brussels."

    "Oh, sir, if you know who this man is," cried D'Artagnan, "tellme who he is, and whence he is.  I will then release you from allyour promises--even that of procuring my admission into theMusketeers; for before everything, I wish to avenge myself.""Beware, young man!"  cried Treville.  "If you see him coming onone side of the street, pass by on the other.  Do not castyourself against such a rock; he would break you like glass.""That will not prevent me," replied D'Artagnan, "if ever I findhim."

    "In the meantime," said Treville, "seek him not--if I have aright to advise you."

    All at once the captain stopped, as if struck by a suddensuspicion.  This great hatred which the young traveler manifestedso loudly for this man, who--a rather improbable thing--hadstolen his father's letter from him--was there not some perfidyconcealed under this hatred?  Might not this young man be sent byhis Eminence?  Might he not have come for the purpose of laying asnare for him?  This pretended D'Artagnan--was he not an emissaryof the cardinal, whom the cardinal sought to introduce intoTreville's house, to place near him, to win his confidence, andafterward to ruin him as had been done in a thousand otherinstances?  He fixed his eyes upon D'Artagnan even more earnestlythan before.  He was moderately reassured however, by the aspectof that countenance, full of astute intelligence and affectedhumility.  "I know he is a Gascon," reflected he, "but he may beone for the cardinal was well as for me.  
Let us try him.""My friend," said he, slowly, "I wish, as the son of an ancientfriend--for I consider this story of the lost letter perfectlytrue--I wish, I say, in order to repair the coldness you may haveremarked in my reception of you, to discover to you the secretsof our policy.  The king and the cardinal are the best offriends; their apparent bickerings are only feints to deceivefools.  I am not willing that a compatriot, a handsome cavalier,a brave youth, quite fit to make his way, should become the dupeof all these artifices and fall into the snare after the exampleof so many others who have been ruined by it.  Be assured that Iam devoted to both these all-powerful masters, and that myearnest endeavors have no other aim than the service of the king,and also the cardinal--one of the most illustrious geniuses thatFrance has ever produced.

    "Now, young man, regulate your conduct accordingly; and if youentertain, whether from your family, your relations, or even fromyour instincts, any of these enmities which we see constantly breaking out against the cardinal, bid me adieu and let usseparate.  I will aid you in many ways, but without attaching youto my person.  I hope that my frankness at least will make you myfriend; for you are the only young man to whom I have hithertospoken as I have done to you."

    Treville said to himself:  "If the cardinal has set this youngfox upon me, he will certainly not have failed--he, who knows howbitterly I execrate him--to tell his spy that the best means ofmaking his court to me is to rail at him.  Therefore, in spite ofall my protestations, if it be as I suspect, my cunning gossipwill assure me that he holds his Eminence in horror."It, however, proved otherwise.  D'Artagnan answered, with thegreatest simplicity:  "I came to Paris with exactly suchintentions.  My father advised me to stoop to nobody but theking, the cardinal, and yourself--whom he considered the firstthree personages in France."

    D'Artagnan added M. de Treville to the others, as may beperceived; but he thought this addition would do no harm."I have the greatest veneration for the cardinal," continued he,"and the most profound respect for his actions.  So much thebetter for me, sir, if you speak to me, as you say, withfrankness--for then you will do me the honor to esteem theresemblance of our opinions; but if you have entertained anydoubt, as naturally you may, I feel that I am ruining myself byspeaking the truth.  But I still trust you will not esteem me theless for it, and that is my object beyond all others."M. de Treville was surprised to the greatest degree.  
So muchpenetration, so much frankness, created admiration, but did notentirely remove his suspicions.  The more this young man wassuperior to others, the more he was to be dreaded of he meant todeceive him; "You are an honest youth; but at the present momentI can only do for you that which I just now offered.  My hotelwill be always open to you.  Hereafter, being able to ask for meat all hours, and consequently to take advantage of allopportunities, you will probably obtain that which you desire.""That is to say," replied D'Artagnan, "that you will wait until Ihave proved myself worthy of it.  Well, be assured," added he,with the familiarity of a Gascon, "you shall not wait long."  Andhe bowed in order to retire, and as if he considered the future in his own hands.

    "But wait a minute," said M. de Treville, stopping him.  "Ipromised you a letter for the director of the Academy.  Are youtoo proud to accept it, young gentleman?"

    "No, sir," said D'Artagnan; "and I will guard it so carefullythat I will be sworn it shall arrive at its address, and woe beto him who shall attempt to take it from me!"

    M. de Treville smiled at this flourish; and leaving his young mancompatriot in the embrasure of the window, where they had talkedtogether, he seated himself at a table in order to write thepromised letter of recommendation.  While he was doing this,D'Artagnan, having no better employment, amused himself withbeating a march upon the window and with looking at theMusketeers, who went away, one after another, following them withhis eyes until they disappeared.

    M. de Treville, after having written the letter, sealed it, andrising, approached the young man in order to give it to him.  Butat the very moment when D'Artagnan stretched out his hand toreceive it, M. de Treville was highly astonished to see hisprotege make a sudden spring, become crimson with passion, andrush from the cabinet crying, "S'blood, he shall not escape methis time!"

    "And who?" asked M. de Treville.

    "He, my thief!" replied D'Artagnan.  "Ah, the traitor!" and hedisappeared.

    "The devil take the madman!" murmured M. de Treville, "unless,"added he, "this is a cunning mode of escaping, seeing that he hadfailed in his purpose!"

    4  THE SHOULDER OF ATHOS, THE BALDRIC OF PORTHOS AND THEHANDKERCHIEF OF ARAMIS

    D'Artagnan, in a state of fury, crossed the antechamber at threebounds, and was darting toward the stairs, which he reckoned upondescending four at a time, when, in his heedless course, he ranhead foremost against a Musketeer who was coming out of one of M.de Treville's private rooms, and striking his shoulder violently,made him utter a cry, or rather a howl.

    "Excuse me," said D'Artagnan, endeavoring to resume his course,"excuse me, but I am in a hurry."

    Scarcely had he descended the first stair, when a hand of ironseized him by the belt and stopped him.

    "You are in a hurry?" said the Musketeer, as pale as a sheet."Under that pretense you run against me!  You say. 'Excuse me,'and you believe that is sufficient?  Not at all my young man.  Doyou fancy because you have heard Monsieur de Treville speak to usa little cavalierly today that other people are to treat us as hespeaks to us?  Undeceive yourself, comrade, you are not Monsieurde Treville."

    "My faith!" replied D'Artagnan, recognizing Athos, who, after thedressing performed by the doctor, was returning to his ownapartment.  "I did not do it intentionally, and not doing itintentionally, I said 'Excuse me.'  It appears to me that this isquite enough.  I repeat to you, however, and this time on my wordof honor--I think perhaps too often--that I am in haste, greathaste.  Leave your hold, then, I beg of you, and let me go wheremy business calls me."

    "Monsieur," said Athos, letting him go, "you are not polite; itis easy to perceive that you come from a distance."D'Artagnan had already strode down three or four stairs, but atAthos's last remark he stopped short.

    "MORBLEU, monsieur!" said he, "however far I may come, it is notyou who can give me a lesson in good manners, I warn you.""Perhaps," said Athos.

    "Ah!  If I were not in such haste, and if I were not runningafter someone," said D'Artagnan.

    "Monsieur Man-in-a-hurry, you can find me without running--ME,you understand?"

    "And where, I pray you?"

    "Near the Carmes-Deschaux."

    "At what hour?"

    "About noon."

    "About noon?  That will do; I will be there."

    "Endeavor not to make me wait; for at quarter past twelve I willcut off your ears as you run."

    "Good!" cried D'Artagnan, "I will be there ten minutes beforetwelve."  And he set off running as if the devil possessed him,hoping that he might yet find the stranger, whose slow pace couldnot have carried him far.

    But at the street gate, Porthos was talking with the soldier onguard.  Between the two talkers there was just enough room for aman to pass.  D'Artagnan thought it would suffice for him, and hesprang forward like a dart between them.  But D'Artagnan hadreckoned without the wind.  As he was about to pass, the windblew out Porthos's long cloak, and D'Artagnan rushed straightinto the middle of it.  Without doubt, Porthos had reasons fornot abandoning this part of his vestments, for instead ofquitting his hold on the flap in his hand, he pulled it toward him, so that D'Artagnan rolled himself up in the velvet by amovement of rotation explained by the persistency of Porthos.D'Artagnan, hearing the Musketeer swear, wished to escape fromthe cloak, which blinded him, and sought to find his way fromunder the folds of it.  He was particularly anxious to avoidmarring the freshness of the magnificent baldric we areacquainted with; but on timidly opening his eyes, he foundhimself with his nose fixed between the two shoulders ofPorthos--that is to say, exactly upon the baldric.Alas, like most things in this world which have nothing in theirfavor but appearances, the baldric was glittering with gold inthe front, but was nothing but simple buff behind.  Vaingloriousas he was, Porthos could not afford to have a baldric wholly ofgold, but had at least half.  One could comprehend the necessityof the cold and the urgency of the cloak.

    "Bless me!" cried Porthos, making strong efforts to disembarrasshimself of D'Artagnan, who was wriggling about his back; "youmust be mad to run against people in this manner.""Excuse me," said D'Artagnan, reappearing under the shoulder ofthe giant, "but I am in such haste--I was running after someoneand--"

    "And do you always forget your eyes when you run?" asked Porthos."No," replied D'Artagnan, piqued, "and thanks to my eyes, I cansee what other people cannot see."

    Whether Porthos understood him or did not understand him, givingway to his anger, "Monsieur," said he, "you stand a chance ofgetting chastised if you rub Musketeers in this fashion.""Chastised, Monsieur!" said D'Artagnan, "the expression isstrong."

    "It is one that becomes a man accustomed to look his enemies inthe face."

    "Ah, PARDIEU!  I know full well that you don't turn your back toyours."

    And the young man, delighted with his joke, went away laughingloudly.

    Porthos foamed with rage, and made a movement to rush afterD'Artagnan.

    "Presently, presently," cried the latter, "when you haven't yourcloak on."

    "At one o'clock, then, behind the Luxembourg."

    "Very well, at one o'clock, then," replied D'Artagnan, turningthe angle of the street.

    But neither in the street he had passed through, nor in the onewhich his eager glance pervaded, could he see anyone; howeverslowly the stranger had walked, he was gone on his way, orperhaps had entered some house.  D'Artagnan inquired of everyonehe met with, went down to the ferry, came up again by the Rue deSeine, and the Red Cross; but nothing, absolutely nothing!  Thischase was, however, advantageous to him in one sense, for inproportion as the perspiration broke from his forehead, his heartbegan to cool.

    He began to reflect upon the events that had passed; they werenumerous and inauspicious.  It was scarcely eleven o'clock in themorning, and yet this morning had already brought him intodisgrace with M. de Treville, who could not fail to think themanner in which D'Artagnan had left him a little cavalier.Besides this, he had drawn upon himself two good duels with twomen, each capable of killing three D'Artagnans-with twoMusketeers, in short, with two of those beings whom he esteemedso greatly that he placed them in his mind and heart above allother men.

    The outlook was sad.  Sure of being killed by Athos, it mayeasily be understood that the young man was not very uneasy aboutPorthos.  As hope, however, is the last thing extinguished in theheart of man, he finished by hoping that he might survive, eventhough with terrible wounds, in both these duels; and in case ofsurviving, he made the following reprehensions upon his ownconduct:

    "What a madcap I was, and what a stupid fellow I am!  That braveand unfortunate Athos was wounded on that very shoulder againstwhich I must run head foremost, like a ram.  The only thing thatastonishes me is that he did not strike me dead at once.  He hadgood cause to do so; the pain I gave him must have beenatrocious.  As to Porthos--oh, as to Porthos, faith, that's adroll affair!"

    And in spite of himself, the young man began to laugh aloud,looking round carefully, however, to see that his solitary laugh,without a cause in the eyes of passers-by, offended no one."As to Porthos, that is certainly droll; but I am not the less agiddy fool.  Are people to be run against without warning?  No!And have I any right to go and peep under their cloaks to seewhat is not there?  He would have pardoned me, he would certainlyhave pardoned me, if I had not said anything to him about thatcursed baldric--in ambiguous words, it is true, but rather drollyambiguous.  Ah, cursed Gascon that I am, I get from one hobbleinto another.  Friend D'Artagnan," continued he, speaking tohimself with all the amenity that he thought due himself, "if youescape, of which there is not much chance, I would advise you topractice perfect politeness for the future.  You must henceforthbe admired and quoted as a model of it.  To be obliging andpolite does not necessarily make a man a coward.  Look at Aramis,now; Aramis is mildness and grace personified.  Well, did anybodyever dream of calling Aramis a coward?  No, certainly not, andfrom this moment I will endeavor to model myself after him.  Ah!That's strange!  Here he is!"

    D'Artagnan, walking and soliloquizing, had arrived within a fewsteps of the hotel d'Arguillon and in front of that hotelperceived Aramis, chatting gaily with three gentlemen; but as hehad not forgotten that it was in presence of this young man thatM. de Treville had been so angry in the morning, and as a witnessof the rebuke the Musketeers had received was not likely to be atall agreeable, he pretended not to see him.  D'Artagnan, on thecontrary, quite full of his plans of conciliation and courtesy,approached the young men with a profound bow, accompanied by amost gracious smile.  All four, besides, immediately broke offtheir conversation.

    D'Artagnan was not so dull as not to perceive that he was one toomany; but he was not sufficiently broken into the fashions of thegay world to know how to extricate himself gallantly from a falseposition, like that of a man who begins to mingle with people heis scarcely acquainted with and in a conversation that does notconcern him.  He was seeking in his mind, then, for the leastawkward means of retreat, when he remarked that Aramis had lethis handkerchief fall, and by mistake, no doubt, had placed hisfoot upon it.  This appeared to be a favorable opportunity torepair his intrusion.  He stooped, and with the most gracious airhe could assume, drew the handkerchief from under the foot of theMusketeer in spite of the efforts the latter made to detain it,and holding it out to him, said, "I believe, monsieur, that thisis a handkerchief you would be sorry to lose?"

    The handkerchief was indeed richly embroidered, and had a coronetand arms at one of its corners.  Aramis blushed excessively, andsnatched rather than took the handkerchief from the hand of theGascon.

    "Ah, ah!" cried one of the Guards, "will you persist in saying,most discreet Aramis, that you are not on good terms with Madamede Bois-Tracy, when that gracious lady has the kindness to lendyou one of her handkerchiefs?"

    Aramis darted at D'Artagnan one of those looks which inform a manthat he has acquired a mortal enemy.  Then, resuming his mildair, "You are deceived, gentlemen," said he, "this handkerchiefis not mine, and I cannot fancy why Monsieur has taken it intohis head to offer it to me rather than to one of you; and as aproof of what I say, here is mine in my pocket."

    So saying, he pulled out his own handkerchief, likewise a veryelegant handkerchief, and of fine cambric--though cambric wasdear at the period--but a handkerchief without embroidery andwithout arms, only ornamented with a single cipher, that of itsproprietor.

    This time D'Artagnan was not hasty.  He perceived his mistake;but the friends of Aramis were not at all convinced by hisdenial, and one of them addressed the young Musketeer withaffected seriousness.  "If it were as you pretend it is," saidhe, "I should be forced, my dear Aramis, to reclaim it myself;for, as you very well know, Bois-Tracy is an intimate friend ofmine, and I cannot allow the property of his wife to be sportedas a trophy."

    "You make the demand badly," replied Aramis; "and whileacknowledging the justice of your reclamation, I refuse it onaccount of the form."

    "The fact is," hazarded D'Artagnan, timidly, "I did not see thehandkerchief fall from the pocket of Monsieur Aramis.  He had hisfoot upon it, that is all; and I thought from having his footupon it the handkerchief was his."

    "And you were deceived, my dear sir," replied Aramis, coldly,very little sensible to the reparation.  Then turning toward thatone of the guards who had declared himself the friend of Bois-Tracy, "Besides," continued he, "I have reflected, my dearintimate of Bois-Tracy, that I am not less tenderly his friendthan you can possibly be; so that decidedly this handkerchief isas likely to have fallen from your pocket as mine.""No, upon my honor!" cried his Majesty's Guardsman."You are about to swear upon your honor and I upon my word, andthen it will be pretty evident that one of us will have lied.Now, here, Montaran, we will do better than that--let each take ahalf."

    "Of the handkerchief?"

    "Yes."

    "Perfectly just," cried the other two Guardsmen, "the judgment ofKing Solomon!  Aramis, you certainly are full of wisdom!"The young men burst into a laugh, and as may be supposed, theaffair had no other sequel.  In a moment or two the conversationceased, and the three Guardsmen and the Musketeer, after havingcordially shaken hands, separated, the Guardsmen going one wayand Aramis another.

    "Now is my time to make peace with this gallant man," saidD'Artagnan to himself, having stood on one side during the wholeof the latter part of the conversation; and with this goodfeeling drawing near to Aramis, who was departing without payingany attention to him, "Monsieur," said he, "you will excuse me, Ihope."

    "Ah, monsieur," interrupted Aramis, "permit me to observe to youthat you have not acted in this affair as a gallant man ought.""What, monsieur!" cried D'Artagnan, "and do you suppose--""I suppose, monsieur that you are not a fool, and that you knewvery well, although coming from Gascony, that people do not treadupon handkerchiefs without a reason.  What the devil!  Paris isnot paved with cambric!"

    "Monsieur, you act wrongly in endeavoring to mortify me," saidD'Artagnan, in whom the natural quarrelsome spirit began to speakmore loudly than his pacific resolutions.  "I am from Gascony, itis true; and since you know it, there is no occasion to tell youthat Gascons are not very patient, so that when they have beggedto be excused once, were it even for a folly, they are convincedthat they have done already at least as much again as they oughtto have done."

    "Monsieur, what I say to you about the matter," said Aramis, "isnot for the sake of seeking a quarrel.  Thank God, I am not abravo!  And being a Musketeer but for a time, I only fight when Iam forced to do so, and always with great repugnance; but thistime the affair is serious, for here is a lady compromised byyou."

    "By US, you mean!" cried D'Artagnan.

    "Why did you so maladroitly restore me the handkerchief?""Why did you so awkwardly let it fall?"

    "I have said, monsieur, and I repeat, that the handkerchief didnot fall from my pocket."

    "And thereby you have lied twice, monsieur, for I saw it fall.""Ah, you take it with that tone, do you, Master Gascon?  Well, Iwill teach you how to behave yourself."

    "And I will send you back to your Mass book, Master Abbe.  Draw,if you please, and instantly--"

    "Not so, if you please, my good friend--not here, at least.  Doyou not perceive that we are opposite the Hotel d'Arguillon,which is full of the cardinal's creatures?  How do I know thatthis is not his Eminence who has honored you with the commissionto procure my head?  Now, I entertain a ridiculous partiality formy head, it seems to suit my shoulders so correctly.  I wish tokill you, be at rest as to that, but to kill you quietly in asnug, remote place, where you will not be able to boast of yourdeath to anybody."

    "I agree, monsieur; but do not be too confident.  Take yourhandkerchief; whether it belongs to you or another, you mayperhaps stand in need of it."

    "Monsieur is a Gascon?" asked Aramis.

    "Yes.  Monsieur does not postpone an interview through prudence?""Prudence, monsieur, is a virtue sufficiently useless toMusketeers, I know, but indispensable to churchmen; and as I amonly a Musketeer provisionally, I hold it good to be prudent.  Attwo o'clock I shall have the honor of expecting you at the hotelof Monsieur de Treville.  There I will indicate to you the bestplace and time."

    The two young men bowed and separated, Aramis ascending thestreet which led to the Luxembourg, while D'Artagnan, perceivingthe appointed hour was approaching, took the road to theCarmes-Deschaux, saying to himself, "Decidedly I can't draw back;but at least, if I am killed, I shall be killed by a Musketeer."

    5  THE KING'S MUSKETEERS AND THE CARDINAL'S GUARDSD'Artagnan was acquainted with nobody in Paris.  He wenttherefore to his appointment with Athos without a second,determined to be satisfied with those his adversary shouldchoose.  Besides, his intention was formed to make the braveMusketeer all suitable apologies, but without meanness orweakness, fearing that might result from this duel whichgenerally results from an affair of this kind, when a young andvigorous man fights with an adversary who is wounded andweakened--if conquered, he doubles the triumph of his antagonist;if a conqueror, he is accused of foul play and want of courage.Now, we must have badly painted the character of our adventureseeker, or our readers must have already perceived thatD'Artagnan was not an ordinary man; therefore, while repeating tohimself that his death was inevitable, he did not make up hismind to die quietly, as one less courageous and less restrainedmight have done in his place.  
He reflected upon the differentcharacters of men he had to fight with, and began to view hissituation more clearly.  He hoped, by means of loyal excuses, tomake a friend of Athos, whose lordly air and austere bearingpleased him much.  He flattered himself he should be able tofrighten Porthos with the adventure of the baldric, which hemight, if not killed upon the spot, relate to everybody a recitalwhich, well managed, would cover Porthos with ridicule.  As tothe astute Aramis, he did not entertain much dread of him; andsupposing he should be able to get so far, he determined todispatch him in good style or at least, by hitting him in theface, as Caesar recommended his soldiers do to those of Pompey,to damage forever the beauty of which he was so proud.In addition to this, D'Artagnan possessed that invincible stockof resolution which the counsels of his father had implanted inhis heart: "Endure nothing from anyone but the king, thecardinal, and Monsieur de Treville."  He flew, then, rather thanwalked, toward the convent of the Carmes Dechausses, or ratherDeschaux, as it was called at that period, a sort of buildingwithout a window, surrounded by barren fields--an accessory tothe Preaux-Clercs, and which was generally employed as the placefor the duels of men who had no time to lose.

    When D'Artagnan arrived in sight of the bare spot of ground whichextended along the foot of the monastery, Athos had been waitingabout five minutes, and twelve o'clock was striking.  He was,then, as punctual as the Samaritan woman, and the most rigorouscasuist with regard to duels could have nothing to say.Athos, who still suffered grievously from his wound, though ithad been dressed anew by M. de Treville's surgeon, was seated ona post and waiting for his adversary with hat in hand, hisfeather even touching the ground.

    "Monsieur," said Athos, "I have engaged two of my friends asseconds; but these two friends are not yet come, at which I amastonished, as it is not at all their custom."

    "I have no seconds on my part, monsieur," said D'Artagnan; "forhaving only arrived yesterday in Paris, I as yet know no one butMonsieur de Treville, to whom I was recommended by my father, whohas the honor to be, in some degree, one of his friends."Athos reflected for an instant.  "You know no one but Monsieur deTreville?" he asked.

    "Yes, monsieur, I know only him."

    "Well, but then," continued Athos, speaking half to himself, "ifI kill you, I shall have the air of a boy-slayer.""Not too much so," replied D'Artagnan, with a bow that was notdeficient in dignity, "since you do me the honor to draw a swordwith me while suffering from a wound which is very inconvenient.""Very inconvenient, upon my word; and you hurt me devilishly, Ican tell you.  But I will take the left hand--it is my custom insuch circumstances.  Do not fancy that I do you a favor; I useeither hand easily.  And it will be even a disadvantage to you; aleft-handed man is very troublesome to people who are notprepared for it.  I regret I did not inform you sooner of thiscircumstance."

    "You have truly, monsieur," said D'Artagnan, bowing again, "acourtesy, for which, I assure you, I am very grateful.""You confuse me," replied Athos, with his gentlemanly air; "letus talk of something else, if you please.  Ah, s'blood, how youhave hurt me!  My shoulder quite burns."

    "If you would permit me--" said D'Artagnan, with timidity."What, monsieur?"

    "I have a miraculous balsam for wounds--a balsam given to me bymy mother and of which I have made a trial upon myself.""Well?"

    "Well, I am sure that in less than three days this balsam wouldcure you; and at the end of three days, when you would be cured--well, sir, it would still do me a great honor to be your man."D'Artagnan spoke these words with a simplicity that did honor tohis courtesy, without throwing the least doubt upon his courage."PARDIEU, monsieur!" said Athos, "that's a proposition thatpleases me; not that I can accept it, but a league off it savorsof the gentleman.  Thus spoke and acted the gallant knights ofthe time of Charlemagne, in whom every cavalier ought to seek hismodel.  Unfortunately, we do not live in the times of the greatemperor, we live in the times of the cardinal; and three dayshence, however well the secret might be guarded, it would beknown, I say, that we were to fight, and our combat would beprevented.  I think these fellows will never come.""If you are in haste, monsieur," said D'Artagnan, with the samesimplicity with which a moment before he had proposed to him toput off the duel for three days, "and if it be your will todispatch me at once, do not inconvenience yourself, I pray you.""There is another word which pleases me," cried Athos, with agracious nod to D'Artagnan.  "That did not come from a manwithout a heart.  Monsieur, I love men of your kidney; and Iforesee plainly that if we don't kill each other, I shallhereafter have much pleasure in your conversation.  We will waitfor these gentlemen, so please you; I have plenty of time, and itwill be more correct.  Ah, here is one of them, I believe."In fact, at the end of the Rue Vaugirard the gigantic Porthosappeared.

    "What!" cried D'Artagnan, "is your first witness MonsieurPorthos?"

    "Yes, that disturbs you?"

    "By no means."

    "And here is the second."

    D'Artagnan turned in the direction pointed to by Athos, andperceived Aramis.

    "What!" cried he, in an accent of greater astonishment thanbefore, "your second witness is Monsieur Aramis?""Doubtless!  Are you not aware that we are never seen one withoutthe others, and that we are called among the Musketeers and theGuards, at court and in the city, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, orthe Three Inseparables?  And yet, as you come from Dax or Pau--""From Tarbes," said D'Artagnan.

    "It is probable you are ignorant of this little fact," saidAthos.

    "My faith!" replied D'Artagnan, "you are well named, gentlemen;and my adventure, if it should make any noise, will prove atleast that your union is not founded upon contrasts."In the meantime, Porthos had come up, waved his hand to Athos,and then turning toward D'Artagnan, stood quite astonished.Let us say in passing that he had changed his baldric andrelinquished his cloak.

    "Ah, ah!" said he, "what does this mean?"

    "This is the gentleman I am going to fight with," said Athos,pointing to D'Artagnan with his hand and saluting him with thesame gesture.

    "Why, it is with him I am also going to fight," said Porthos."But not before one o'clock," replied D'Artagnan."And I also am to fight with this gentleman," said Aramis, comingin his turn onto the place.

    "But not until two o'clock," said D'Artagnan, with the samecalmness.

    "But what are you going to fight about, Athos?" asked Aramis."Faith! I don't very well know.  He hurt my shoulder.  And you,Porthos?"

    "Faith!  I am going to fight--because I am going to fight,"answered Porthos, reddening.

    Athos, whose keen eye lost nothing, perceived a faintly sly smilepass over the lips of the young Gascon as he replied, "We had ashort discussion upon dress."

    "And you, Aramis?" asked Athos.

    "Oh, ours is a theological quarrel," replied Aramis, making asign to D'Artagnan to keep secret the cause of their duel.Athos indeed saw a second smile on the lips of D'Artagnan."Indeed?" said Athos.

    "Yes; a passage of St. Augustine, upon which we could not agree,"said the Gascon.

    "Decidedly, this is a clever fellow," murmured Athos."And now you are assembled, gentlemen," said D'Artagnan, "permitme to offer you my apologies.

    At this word APOLOGIES, a cloud passed over the brow of Athos, ahaughty smile curled the lip of Porthos, and a negative sign wasthe reply of Aramis.

    "You do not understand me, gentlemen," said D'Artagnan, throwingup his head, the sharp and bold lines of which were at the momentgilded by a bright ray of the sun.  "I asked to be excused incase I should not be able to discharge my debt to all three; forMonsieur Athos has the right to kill me first, which I must abateyour valor in your own estimation, Monsieur Porthos, and renderyours almost null, Monsieur Aramis.  And now, gentlemen, Irepeat, excuse me, but on that account only, and--on guard!"At these words, with the most gallant air possible, D'Artagnandrew his sword.

    The blood had mounted to the head of D'Artagnan, and at thatmoment he would have drawn his sword against all the Musketeersin the kingdom as willingly as he now did against Athos, Porthos,and Aramis.

    It was a quarter past midday.  The sun was in its zenith, and thespot chosen for the scene of the duel was exposed to its fullardor.

    "It is very hot," said Athos, drawing his sword in its turn, "andyet I cannot take off my doublet; for I just now felt my woundbegin to bleed again, and I should not like to annoy Monsieurwith the sight of blood which he has not drawn from me himself.""That is true, Monsieur," replied D'Artagnan, "and whether drawnby myself or another, I assure you I shall always view withregret the blood of so brave a gentleman.  I will therefore fightin my doublet, like yourself."

    "Come, come, enough of such compliments!" cried Porthos."Remember, we are waiting for our turns."

    "Speak for yourself when you are inclined to utter suchincongruities," interrupted Aramis.  "For my part, I think whatthey say is very well said, and quite worthy of two gentlemen.""When you please, monsieur," said Athos, putting himself onguard.

    "I waited your orders," said D'Artagnan, crossing swords.But scarcely had the two rapiers clashed, when a company of theGuards of his Eminence, commanded by M. de Jussac, turned thecorner of the convent.

    "The cardinal's Guards!" cried Aramis and Porthos at the sametime.  "Sheathe your swords, gentlemen, sheathe your swords!"But it was too late.  The two combatants had been seen in aposition which left no doubt of their intentions."Halloo!" cried Jussac, advancing toward them and making a signto his men to do so likewise, "halloo, Musketeers?  Fightinghere, are you?  And the edicts?  What is become of them?""You are very generous, gentlemen of the Guards," said Athos,full of rancor, for Jussac was one of the aggressors of thepreceding day.  "If we were to see you fighting, I can assure youthat we would make no effort to prevent you.  Leave us alone,then, and you will enjoy a little amusement without cost toyourselves."

    "Gentlemen," said Jussac, "it is with great regret that Ipronounce the thing impossible.  Duty before everything.Sheathe, then, if you please, and follow us."

    "Monsieur," said Aramis, parodying Jussac, "it would afford usgreat pleasure to obey your polite invitation if it depended uponourselves; but unfortunately the thing is impossible--Monsieur deTreville has forbidden it.  Pass on your way, then; it is thebest thing to do."

    This raillery exasperated Jussac.  "We will charge upon you,then," said he, "if you disobey."

    "There are five of them," said Athos, half aloud, "and we are butthree; we shall be beaten again, and must die on the spot, for,on my part, I declare I will never appear again before thecaptain as a conquered man."

    Athos, Porthos, and Aramis instantly drew near one another, whileJussac drew up his soldiers.

    This short interval was sufficient to determine D'Artagnan on thepart he was to take.  It was one of those events which decide thelife of a man; it was a choice between the king and thecardinal--the choice made, it must be persisted in.  To fight,that was to disobey the law, that was to risk his head, that wasto make at one blow an enemy of a minister more powerful than theking himself.  All this young man perceived, and yet, to hispraise we speak it, he did not hesitate a second.  Turningtowards Athos and his friends, "Gentlemen," said he, "allow me tocorrect your words, if you please.  You said you were but three,but it appears to me we are four."

    "But you are not one of us," said Porthos.

    "That's true," replied D'Artagnan; "I have not the uniform, but Ihave the spirit.  My heart is that of a Musketeer; I feel it,monsieur, and that impels me on."

    "Withdraw, young man," cried Jussac, who doubtless, by hisgestures and the expression of his countenance, had guessedD'Artagnan's design.  "You may retire; we consent to that.  Saveyour skin; begone quickly."

    D'Artagnan did not budge.

    "Decidedly, you are a brave fellow," said Athos, pressing theyoung man's hand.

    "Come, come, choose your part," replied Jussac.

    "Well," said Porthos to Aramis, "we must do something.""Monsieur is full of generosity," said Athos.

    But all three reflected upon the youth of D'Artagnan, and dreadedhis inexperience.

    "We should only be three, one of whom is wounded, with theaddition of a boy," resumed Athos; "and yet it will not be theless said we were four men."

    "Yes, but to yield!" said Porthos.

    "That IS difficult," replied Athos.

    D'Artagnan comprehended their irresolution.

    "Try me, gentlemen," said he, "and I swear to you by my honorthat I will not go hence if we are conquered."

    "What is your name, my brave fellow?" said Athos."D'Artagnan, monsieur."

    "Well, then, Athos, Porthos, Aramis, and D'Artagnan, forward!"cried Athos.

    "Come, gentlemen, have you decided?" cried Jussac for the thirdtime.

    "It is done, gentlemen," said Athos.

    "And what is your choice?" asked Jussac.

    "We are about to have the honor of charging you," replied Aramis,lifting his hat with one hand and drawing his sword with theother.

    "Ah! You resist, do you?" cried Jussac.

    "S'blood; does that astonish you?"

    And the nine combatants rushed upon each other with a fury whichhowever did not exclude a certain degree of method.Athos fixed upon a certain Cahusac, a favorite of the cardinal's.Porthos had Bicarat, and Aramis found himself opposed to twoadversaries.  As to D'Artagnan, he sprang toward Jussac himself.The heart of the young Gascon beat as if it would burst throughhis side--not from fear, God he thanked, he had not the shade ofit, but with emulation; he fought like a furious tiger, turningten times round his adversary, and changing his ground and hisguard twenty times.  Jussac was, as was then said, a fine blade,and had had much practice; nevertheless it required all his skillto defend himself against an adversary who, active and energetic,departed every instant from received rules, attacking him on allsides at once, and yet parrying like a man who had the greatestrespect for his own epidermis.

    This contest at length exhausted Jussac's patience.  Furious atbeing held in check by one whom he had considered a boy, hebecame warm and began to make mistakes.  D'Artagnan, who thoughwanting in practice had a sound theory, redoubled his agility.Jussac, anxious to put an end to this, springing forward, aimed aterrible thrust at his adversary, but the latter parried it; andwhile Jussac was recovering himself, glided like a serpentbeneath his blade, and passed his sword through his body.  Jussacfell like a dead mass.

    D'Artagnan then cast an anxious and rapid glance over the fieldof battle.

    Aramis had killed one of his adversaries, but the other pressedhim warmly.  Nevertheless, Aramis was in a good situation, andable to defend himself.

    Bicarat and Porthos had just made counterhits.  Porthos hadreceived a thrust through his arm, and Bicarat one through histhigh.  But neither of these two wounds was serious, and theyonly fought more earnestly.

    Athos, wounded anew by Cahusac, became evidently paler, but didnot give way a foot.  He only changed his sword hand, and foughtwith his left hand.

    According to the laws of dueling at that period, D'Artagnan wasat liberty to assist whom he pleased.  While he was endeavoringto find out which of his companions stood in greatest need, hecaught a glance from Athos.  The glance was of sublime eloquence.Athos would have died rather than appeal for help; but he couldlook, and with that look ask assistance.  D'Artagnan interpretedit; with a terrible bound he sprang to the side of Cahusac,crying, "To me, Monsieur Guardsman; I will slay you!"Cahusac turned.  It was time; for Athos, whose great couragealone supported him, sank upon his knee.

    "S'blood!" cried he to D'Artagnan, "do not kill him, young man, Ibeg of you.  I have an old affair to settle with him when I amcured and sound again.  Disarm him only--make sure of his sword.That's it!  Very well done!"

    The exclamation was drawn from Athos by seeing the sword ofCahusac fly twenty paces from him.  D'Artagnan and Cahusac sprangforward at the same instant, the one to recover, the other toobtain, the sword; but D'Artagnan, being the more active, reachedit first and placed his foot upon it.

    Cahusac immediately ran to the Guardsman whom Aramis had killed,seized his rapier, and returned toward D'Artagnan; but on his wayhe met Athos, who during his relief which D'Artagnan had procuredhim had recovered his breath, and who, for fear that D'Artagnanwould kill his enemy, wished to resume the fight.D'Artagnan perceived that it would be disobliging Athos not toleave him alone; and in a few minutes Cahusac fell, with a swordthrust through his throat.

    At the same instant Aramis placed his sword point on the breastof his fallen enemy, and forced him to ask for mercy.There only then remained Porthos and Bicarat.  Porthos made athousand flourishes, asking Bicarat what o'clock it could be, andoffering him his compliments upon his brother's having justobtained a company in the regiment of Navarre; but, jest as hemight, he gained nothing.  Bicarat was one of those iron men whonever fell dead.

    Nevertheless, it was necessary to finish.  The watch might comeup and take all the combatants, wounded or not, royalists orcardinalists.  Athos, Aramis, and D'Artagnan surrounded Bicarat,and required him to surrender.  Though alone against all and witha wound in his thigh, Bicarat wished to hold out; but Jussac, whohad risen upon his elbow, cried out to him to yield.  Bicarat wasa Gascon, as D'Artagnan was; he turned a deaf ear, and contentedhimself with laughing, and between two parries finding time topoint to a spot of earth with his sword, "Here," cried he,parodying a verse of the Bible, "here will Bicarat die; for Ionly am left, and they seek my life."

    "But there are four against you; leave off, I command you.""Ah, if you command me, that's another thing," said Bicarat.  "Asyou are my commander, it is my duty to obey."  And springingbackward, he broke his sword across his knee to avoid thenecessity of surrendering it, threw the pieces over the conventwall, and crossed him arms, whistling a cardinalist air.Bravery is always respected, even in an enemy.  The Musketeerssaluted Bicarat with their swords, and returned them to theirsheaths.  D'Artagnan did the same.  Then, assisted by Bicarat,the only one left standing, he bore Jussac, Cahusac, and one ofAramis's adversaries who was only wounded, under the porch of theconvent.  The fourth, as we have said, was dead.  They then rangthe bell, and carrying away four swords out of five, they tooktheir road, intoxicated with joy, toward the hotel of M. deTreville.

    They walked arm in arm, occupying the whole width of the streetand taking in every Musketeer they met, so that in the end itbecame a triumphal march.  The heart of D'Artagnan swam indelirium; he marched between Athos and Porthos, pressing themtenderly.

    "If I am not yet a Musketeer," said he to his new friends, as hepassed through the gateway of M. de Treville's hotel, "at least Ihave entered upon my apprenticeship, haven't I?"

    6  HIS MAJESTY KING LOUIS XIII

    This affair made a great noise.  M. de Treville scolded hisMusketeers in public, and congratulated them in private; but asno time was to be lost in gaining the king, M. de Trevillehastened to report himself at the Louvre.  It was already toolate.  The king was closeted with the cardinal, and M. deTreville was informed that the king was busy and could notreceive him at that moment.  In the evening M. de Trevilleattended the king's gaming table.  The king was winning; and ashe was very avaricious, he was in an excellent humor.  PerceivingM. de Treville at a distance--

    "Come here, Monsieur Captain," said he, "come here, that I maygrowl at you.  Do you know that his Eminence has been makingfresh complaints against your Musketeers, and that with so muchemotion, that this evening his Eminence is indisposed?  Ah, theseMusketeers of yours are very devils--fellows to be hanged.""No, sire," replied Treville, who saw at the first glance howthings would go, "on the contrary, they are good creatures, asmeek as lambs, and have but one desire, I'll be their warranty.And that is that their swords may never leave their scabbards butin your majesty's service.  But what are they to do?  The Guardsof Monsieur the Cardinal are forever seeking quarrels with them,and for the honor of the corps even, the poor young men areobliged to defend themselves."

    "Listen to Monsieur de Treville," said the king; "listen to him!Would not one say he was speaking of a religious community?  Intruth, my dear Captain, I have a great mind to take away yourcommission and give it to Mademoiselle de Chemerault, to whom Ipromised an abbey.  But don't fancy that I am going to take youon your bare word.  I am called Louis the Just, Monsieur deTreville, and by and by, by and by we will see."

    "Ah, sire; it is because I confide in that justice that I shallwait patiently and quietly the good pleasure of your Majesty."

    "Wait, then, monsieur, wait," said the king; "I will not detainyou long."

    In fact, fortune changed; and as the king began to lose what hehad won, he was not sorry to find an excuse for playingCharlemagne--if we may use a gaming phrase of whose origin weconfess our ignorance.  The king therefore arose a minute after,and putting the money which lay before him into his pocket, themajor part of which arose from his winnings, "La Vieuville," saidhe, "take my place; I must speak to Monsieur de Treville on anaffair of importance.  Ah, I had eighty louis before me; put downthe same sum, so that they who have lost may have nothing tocomplain of.  Justice before everything."

    Then turning toward M. de Treville and walking with him towardthe embrasure of a window, "Well, monsieur," continued he, "yousay it is his Eminence's Guards who have sought a quarrel withyour Musketeers?"

    "Yes, sire, as they always do."

    "And how did the thing happen?  Let us see, for you know, my dearCaptain, a judge must hear both sides."

    "Good Lord!  In the most simple and natural manner possible.Three of my best soldiers, whom your Majesty knows by name, andwhose devotedness you have more than once appreciated, and whohave, I dare affirm to the king, his service much at heart--threeof my best soldiers, I say, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, had madea party of pleasure with a young fellow from Gascony, whom I hadintroduced to them the same morning.  The party was to take placeat St. Germain, I believe, and they had appointed to meet at theCarmes-Deschaux, when they were disturbed by De Jussac, Cahusac,Bicarat, and two other Guardsmen, who certainly did not go therein such a numerous company without some ill intention against theedicts."

    "Ah, ah!  You incline me to think so," said the king.  "There isno doubt they went thither to fight themselves."

    "I do not accuse them, sire; but I leave your Majesty to judgewhat five armed men could possibly be going to do in such adeserted place as the neighborhood of the Convent des Carmes.""Yes, you are right, Treville, you are right!"

    "Then, upon seeing my Musketeers they changed their minds, andforgot their private hatred for partisan hatred; for your Majestycannot be ignorant that the Musketeers, who belong to the kingand nobody but the king, are the natural enemies of theGuardsmen, who belong to the cardinal."

    "Yes, Treville, yes," said the king, in a melancholy tone; "andit is very sad, believe me, to see thus two parties in France,two heads to royalty. But all this will come to an end, Treville,will come to an end.  You say, then, that the Guardsmen sought aquarrel with the Musketeers?"

    "I say that it is probable that things have fallen out so, but Iwill not swear to it, sire.  You know how difficult it is todiscover the truth; and unless a man be endowed with thatadmirable instinct which causes Louis XIII to be named theJust--"

    "You are right, Treville; but they were not alone, yourMusketeers.  They had a youth with them?"

    "Yes, sire, and one wounded man; so that three of the king'sMusketeers--one of whom was wounded--and a youth not onlymaintained their ground against five of the most terrible of thecardinal's Guardsmen, but absolutely brought four of them toearth."

    "Why, this is a victory!" cried the king, all radiant, "acomplete victory!"

    "Yes, sire; as complete as that of the Bridge of Ce.""Four men, one of them wounded, and a youth, say you?""One hardly a young man; but who, however, behaved himself soadmirably on this occasion that I will take the liberty ofrecommending him to your Majesty."

    "How does he call himself?"

    "D'Artagnan, sire; he is the son of one of my oldest friends--theson of a man who served under the king your father, of gloriousmemory, in the civil war."

    "And you say this young man behaved himself well?  Tell me how,Treville--you know how I delight in accounts of war andfighting."

    And Louis XIII twisted his mustache proudly, placing his handupon his hip.

    "Sire," resumed Treville, "as I told you, Monsieur d'Artagnan islittle more than a boy; and as he has not the honor of being aMusketeer, he was dressed as a citizen.  The Guards of thecardinal, perceiving his youth and that he did not belong to thecorps, invited him to retire before they attacked.""so you may plainly see, Treville," interrupted the king, "it wasthey who attacked?"

    "That is true, sire; there can be no more doubt on that head.They called upon him then to retire; but he answered that he wasa Musketeer at heart, entirely devoted to your Majesty, and thattherefore he would remain with Messieurs the Musketeers.""Brave young man!" murmured the king.

    "Well, he did remain with them; and your Majesty has in him sofirm a champion that it was he who gave Jussac the terrible swordthrust which has made the cardinal so angry."

    "He who wounded Jussac!" cried the king, "he, a boy!  Treville,that's impossible!"

    "It is as I have the honor to relate it to your Majesty.""Jussac, one of the first swordsmen in the kingdom?""Well, sire, for once he found his master."

    "I will see this young, Treville--I will see him; and if anythingcan be done--well, we will make it our business.""When will your Majesty deign to receive him?"

    "Tomorrow, at midday, Treville."

    "Shall I bring him alone?"

    "No, bring me all four together.  I wish to thank them all atonce.  Devoted men are so rare, Treville, by the back staircase.It is useless to let the cardinal know."

    "Yes, sire."

    "You understand, Treville--an edict is still an edict, it isforbidden to fight, after all."

    "But this encounter, sire, is quite out of the ordinaryconditions of a duel.  It is a brawl; and the proof is that therewere five of the cardinal's Guardsmen against my three Musketeersand Monsieur d'Artagnan."

    "That is true," said the king; "but never mind, Treville, comestill by the back staircase."

    Treville smiled; but as it was indeed something to have prevailedupon this child to rebel against his master, he saluted the kingrespectfully, and with this agreement, took leave of him.That evening the three Musketeers were informed of the honoraccorded them.  As they had long been acquainted with the king,they were not much excited; but D'Artagnan, with his Gasconimagination, saw in it his future fortune, and passed the nightin golden dreams.  By eight o'clock in the morning he was at theapartment of Athos.

    D'Artagnan found the Musketeer dressed and ready to go out.  Asthe hour to wait upon the king was not till twelve, he had made aparty with Porthos and Aramis to play a game at tennis in atennis court situated near the stables of the Luxembourg.  Athosinvited D'Artagnan to follow them; and although ignorant of thegame, which he had never played, he accepted, not knowing what todo with his time from nine o'clock in the morning, as it thenscarcely was, till twelve.

    The two Musketeers were already there, and were playing together.Athos, who was very expert in all bodily exercises, passed withD'Artagnan to the opposite side and challenged them; but at thefirst effort he made, although he played with his left hand, hefound that his wound was yet too recent to allow of suchexertion.  D'Artagnan remained, therefore, alone; and as hedeclared he was too ignorant of the game to play it regularlythey only continued giving balls to one another without counting.But one of these balls, launched by Porthos' herculean hand,passed so close to D'Artagnan's face that he thought that if,instead of passing near, it had hit him, his audience would havebeen probably lost, as it would have been impossible for him topresent himself before the king.  Now, as upon this audience, inhis Gascon imagination, depended his future life, he salutedAramis and Porthos politely, declaring that he would not resumethe game until he should be prepared to play with them on moreequal terms, and went and took his place near the cord and in thegallery.

    Unfortunately for D'Artagnan, among the spectators was one of hisEminence's Guardsmen, who, still irritated by the defeat of hiscompanions, which had happened only the day before, had promisedhimself to seize the first opportunity of avenging it.  Hebelieved this opportunity was now come and addressed hisneighbor:  "It is not astonishing that that young man should beafraid of a ball, for he is doubtless a Musketeer apprentice."D'Artagnan turned round as if a serpent had stung him, and fixedhis eyes intensely upon the Guardsman who had just made thisinsolent speech.

    "PARDIEU," resumed the latter, twisting his mustache, "look at meas long as you like, my little gentleman!  I have said what Ihave said."

    "And as since that which you have said is too clear to requireany explanation," replied D'Artagnan, in a low voice, "I beg youto follow me."

    "And when?" asked the Guardsman, with the same jeering air."At once, if you please."

    "And you know who I am, without doubt?"

    "I?  I am completely ignorant; nor does it much disquiet me.""You're in the wrong there; for if you knew my name, perhaps youwould not be so pressing."

    "What is your name?"

    "Bernajoux, at your service."

    "Well, then, Monsieur Bernajoux," said D'Artagnan, tranquilly, "Iwill wait for you at the door."

    "Go, monsieur, I will follow you."

    "Do not hurry yourself, monsieur, lest it be observed that we goout together.  You must be aware that for our undertaking,company would be in the way."

    "That's true," said the Guardsman, astonished that his name hadnot produced more effect upon the young man.

    Indeed, the name of Bernajoux was known to all the world,D'Artagnan alone excepted, perhaps; for it was one of those whichfigured most frequently in the daily brawls which all the edictsof the cardinal could not repress.

    Porthos and Aramis were so engaged with their game, and Athos waswatching them with so much attention, that they did not evenperceive their young companion go out, who, as he had told theGuardsman of his Eminence, stopped outside the door.  An instantafter, the Guardsman descended in his turn.  As D'Artagnan had notime to lose, on account of the audience of the king, which wasfixed for midday, he cast his eyes around, and seeing that thestreet was empty, said to his adversary, "My faith!  It isfortunate for you, although your name is Bernajoux, to have onlyto deal with an apprentice Musketeer.  Never mind; be content, Iwill do my best.  On guard!"

    "But," said he whom D'Artagnan thus provoked, "it appears to methat this place is badly chosen, and that we should be betterbehind the Abbey St. Germain or in the Pre-aux-Clercs.""What you say is full of sense," replied D'Artagnan; "butunfortunately I have very little time to spare, having anappointment at twelve precisely.  On guard, then, monsieur, onguard!"

    Bernajoux was not a man to have such a compliment paid to himtwice.  In an instant his sword glittered in his hand, and hesprang upon his adversary, whom, thanks to his greatyouthfulness, he hoped to intimidate.

    But D'Artagnan had on the preceding day served hisapprenticeship.  Fresh sharpened by his victory, full of hopes offuture favor, he was resolved not to recoil a step.  So the twoswords were crossed close to the hilts, and as D'Artagnan stoodfirm, it was his adversary who made the retreating step; butD'Artagnan seized the moment at which, in this movement, thesword of Bernajoux deviated from the line.  He freed his weapon,made a lunge, and touched his adversary on the shoulder.D'Artagnan immediately made a step backward and raised his sword;but Bernajoux cried out that it was nothing, and rushing blindlyupon him, absolutely spitted himself upon D'Artagnan's sword.As, however, he did not fall, as he did not declare himselfconquered, but only broke away toward the hotel of M. de laTremouille, in whose service he had a relative, D'Artagnan wasignorant of the seriousness of the last wound his adversary hadreceived, and pressing him warmly, without doubt would soon havecompleted his work with a third blow, when the noise which arosefrom the street being heard in the tennis court, two of thefriends of the Guardsman, who had seen him go out afterexchanging some words with D'Artagnan, rushed, sword in hand,from the court, and fell upon the conqueror.  But Athos, Porthos,and Aramis quickly appeared in their turn, and the moment the twoGuardsmen attacked their young companion, drove them back.Bernajoux now fell, and as the Guardsmen were only two againstfour, they began to cry, "To the rescue!  The Hotel de laTremouille!"  At these cries, all who were in the hotel rushedout and fell upon the four companions, who on their side criedaloud, "To the rescue, Musketeers!"

    This cry was generally heeded; for the Musketeers were known tobe enemies of the cardinal, and were beloved on account of thehatred they bore to his Eminence.  Thus the soldiers of othercompanies than those which belonged to the Red Duke, as Aramishad called him, often took part with the king's Musketeers inthese quarrels.  Of three Guardsmen of the company of M.Dessessart who were passing, two came to the assistance of thefour companions, while the other ran toward the hotel of M. deTreville, crying, "To the rescue, Musketeers!  To the rescue!"As usual, this hotel was full of soldiers of this company, whohastened to the succor of their comrades.  The MELEE becamegeneral, but strength was on the side of the Musketeers.  Thecardinal's Guards and M. de la Tremouille's people retreated intothe hotel, the doors of which they closed just in time to preventtheir enemies from entering with them.  As to the wounded man, hehad been taken in at once, and, as we have said, in a very badstate.

    Excitement was at its height among the Musketeers and theirallies, and they even began to deliberate whether they should notset fire to the hotel to punish the insolence of M. de laTremouille's domestics in daring to make a SORTIE upon the king'sMusketeers.  The proposition had been made, and received withenthusiasm, when fortunately eleven o'clock struck.  D'Artagnanand his companions remembered their audience, and as they wouldvery much have regretted that such an opportunity should be lost,they succeeded in calming their friends, who contented themselveswith hurling some paving stones against the gates; but the gateswere too strong.  They soon tired of the sport.  Besides, thosewho must be considered the leaders of the enterprise had quit thegroup and were making their way toward the hotel of M. deTreville, who was waiting for them, already informed of thisfresh disturbance.

    "Quick to the Louvre," said he, "to the Louvre without losing aninstant, and let us endeavor to see the king before he isprejudiced by the cardinal.  We will describe the thing to him asa consequence of the affair of yesterday, and the two will passoff together."

    M. de Treville, accompanied by the four young fellows, directedhis course toward the Louvre; but to the great astonishment ofthe captain of the Musketeers, he was informed that the king hadgone stag hunting in the forest of St. Germain.  M. de Trevillerequired this intelligence to be repeated to him twice, and eachtime his companions saw his brow become darker.

    "Had his Majesty," asked he, "any intention of holding thishunting party yesterday?"

    "No, your Excellency," replied the valet de chambre, "the Masterof the Hounds came this morning to inform him that he had markeddown a stag.  At first the king answered that he would not go;but he could not resist his love of sport, and set out afterdinner."

    "And the king has seen the cardinal?" asked M. de Treville."In all probability he has," replied the valet, "for I saw thehorses harnessed to his Eminence's carriage this morning, andwhen I asked where he was going, they told me, "To St. Germain.'""He is beforehand with us," said M. de Treville.  "Gentlemen, Iwill see the king this evening; but as to you, I do not adviseyou to risk doing so."

    This advice was too reasonable, and moreover came from a man whoknew the king too well, to allow the four young men to disputeit.  M. de Treville recommended everyone to return home and waitfor news.

    On entering his hotel, M. de Treville thought it best to be firstin making the complaint.  He sent one of his servants to M. de laTremouille with a letter in which he begged of him to eject thecardinal's Guardsmen from his house, and to reprimand his peoplefor their audacity in making SORTIE against the king'sMusketeers.  But M. de la Tremouille--already prejudiced by hisesquire, whose relative, as we already know, Bernajoux was--replied that it was neither for M. de Treville nor the Musketeersto complain, but, on the contrary, for him, whose people theMusketeers had assaulted and whose hotel they had endeavored toburn.  Now, as the debate between these two nobles might last along time, each becoming, naturally, more firm in his ownopinion, M. de Treville thought of an expedient which mightterminate it quietly.  This was to go himself to M. de laTremouille.

    He repaired, therefore, immediately to his hotel, and causedhimself to be announced.

    The two nobles saluted each other politely, for if no friendshipexisted between them, there was at least esteem.  Both were menof courage and honor; and as M. de la Tremouille--a Protestant,and seeing the king seldom--was of no party, he did not, ingeneral, carry any bias into his social relations.  This time,however, his address, although polite, was cooler than usual."Monsieur," said M. de Treville, "we fancy that we have eachcause to complain of the other, and I am come to endeavor toclear up this affair."

    "I have no objection," replied M. de la Tremouille, "but I warnyou that I am well informed, and all the fault is with yourMusketeers."

    "You are too just and reasonable a man, monsieur!" said Treville,"not to accept the proposal I am about to make to you.""Make it, monsieur, I listen."

    "How is Monsieur Bernajoux, your esquire's relative?""Why, monsieur, very ill indeed!  In addition to the sword thrustin his arm, which is not dangerous, he has received another rightthrough his lungs, of which the doctor says bad things.""But has the wounded man retained his senses?"

    "Perfectly."

    "Does he talk?"

    "With difficulty, but he can speak."

    "Well, monsieur, let us go to him.  Let us adjure him, in thename of the God before whom he must perhaps appear, to speak thetruth.  I will take him for judge in his own cause, monsieur, andwill believe what he will say."

    M. de la Tremouille reflected for an instant; then as it wasdifficult to suggest a more reasonable proposal, he agreed to it.Both descended to the chamber in which the wounded man lay.  Thelatter, on seeing these two noble lords who came to visit him,endeavored to raise himself up in his bed; but he was too weak,and exhausted by the effort, he fell back again almost senseless.M. de la Tremouille approached him, and made him inhale somesalts, which recalled him to life.  Then M. de Treville,unwilling that it should be thought that he had influenced thewounded man, requested M. de la Tremouille to interrogate himhimself.

    That happened which M. de Treville had foreseen.  Placed betweenlife and death, as Bernajoux was, he had no idea for a moment ofconcealing the truth; and he described to the two nobles theaffair exactly as it had passed.

    This was all that M. de Treville wanted.  He wished Bernajoux aspeedy convalescence, took leave of M. de la Tremouille, returnedto his hotel, and immediately sent word to the four friends thathe awaited their company at dinner.

    M. de Treville entertained good company, wholly anticardinalst,though.  It may easily be understood, therefore, that theconversation during the whole of dinner turned upon the twochecks that his Eminence's Guardsmen had received.  Now, asD'Artagnan had been the hero of these two fights, it was upon himthat all the felicitations fell, which Athos, Porthos, and Aramisabandoned to him, not only as good comrades, but as men who hadso often had their turn that could very well afford him his.Toward six o'clock M. de Treville announced that it was time togo to the Louvre; but as the hour of audience granted by hisMajesty was past, instead of claiming the ENTREE by the backstairs, he placed himself with the four young men in theantechamber.  The king had not yet returned from hunting.  Ouryoung men had been waiting about half an hour, amid a crowd ofcourtiers, when all the doors were thrown open, and his Majestywas announced.

    At his announcement D'Artagnan felt himself tremble to the verymarrow of his bones.  The coming instant would in all probabilitydecide the rest of his life.  His eyes therefore were fixed in asort of agony upon the door through which the king must enter.Louis XIII appeared, walking fast.  He was in hunting costumecovered with dust, wearing large boots, and holding a whip in hishand.  At the first glance, D'Artagnan judged that the mind ofthe king was stormy.

    This disposition, visible as it was in his Majesty, did notprevent the courtiers from ranging themselves along his pathway.In royal antechambers it is worth more to be viewed with an angryeye than not to be seen at all.  The three Musketeers thereforedid not hesitate to make a step forward.  D'Artagnan on thecontrary remained concealed behind them; but although the kingknew Athos, Porthos, and Aramis personally, he passed before themwithout speaking or looking--indeed, as if he had never seen thembefore.  As for M. de Treville, when the eyes of the king fellupon him, he sustained the look with so much firmness that it wasthe king who dropped his eyes; after which his Majesty,grumbling, entered his apartment.

    "Matters go but badly," said Athos, smiling; "and we shall not bemade Chevaliers of the Order this time."

    "Wait here ten minutes," said M. de Treville; "and if at theexpiration of ten minutes you do not see me come out, return tomy hotel, for it will be useless for you to wait for me longer."The four young men waited ten minutes, a quarter of an hour,twenty minutes; and seeing that M. de Treville did not return,went away very uneasy as to what was going to happen.M. de Treville entered the king's cabinet boldly, and found hisMajesty in a very ill humor, seated on an armchair, beating hisboot with the handle of his whip.  This, however, did not preventhis asking, with the greatest coolness, after his Majesty'shealth.

    "Bad, monsieur, bad!" replied the king; "I am bored."This was, in fact, the worst complaint of Louis XIII, who wouldsometimes take one of his courtiers to a window and say,"Monsieur So-and-so, let us weary ourselves together.""How!  Your Majesty is bored?  Have you not enjoyed the pleasuresof the chase today?"

    "A fine pleasure, indeed, monsieur!  Upon my soul, everythingdegenerates; and I don't know whether it is the game which leavesno scent, or the dogs that have no noses.  We started a stag often branches.  We chased him for six hours, and when he was nearbeing taken--when St.-Simon was already putting his horn to hismouth to sound the HALALI--crack, all the pack takes the wrongscent and sets off after a two-year-older.  I shall be obliged togive up hunting, as I have given up hawking.  Ah, I am anunfortunate king, Monsieur de Treville!  I had but one gerfalcon,and he died day before yesterday."

    "Indeed, sire, I wholly comprehend your disappointment.  Themisfortune is great; but I think you have still a good number offalcons, sparrow hawks, and tiercets."

    "And not a man to instruct them.  Falconers are declining.  Iknow no one but myself who is acquainted with the noble art ofvenery.  After me it will all be over, and people will hunt withgins, snares, and traps.  If I had but the time to train pupils!But there is the cardinal always at hand, who does not leave me amoment's repose; who talks to me about Spain, who talks to meabout Austria, who talks to me about England!  Ah!  A PROPOS ofthe cardinal, Monsieur de Treville, I am vexed with you!"This was the chance at which M. de Treville waited for the king.He knew the king of old, and he knew that all these complaintswere but a preface--a sort of excitation to encourage himself--and that he had now come to his point at last.

    "And in what have I been so unfortunate as to displease yourMajesty?" asked M. de Treville, feigning the most profoundastonishment.

    "Is it thus you perform your charge, monsieur?" continued theking, without directly replying to De Treville's question.  "Isit for this I name you captain of my Musketeers, that they shouldassassinate a man, disturb a whole quarter, and endeavor to setfire to Paris, without your saying a word?  But yet," continuedthe king, "undoubtedly my haste accuses you wrongfully; withoutdoubt the rioters are in prison, and you come to tell me justiceis done."

    "Sire," replied M. de Treville, calmly, "on the contrary, I cometo demand it of you."

    "And against whom?" cried the king.

    "Against calumniators," said M. de Treville.

    "Ah!  This is something new," replied the king.  "Will you tellme that your three damned Musketeers, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis,and your youngster from Bearn, have not fallen, like so manyfuries, upon poor Bernajoux, and have not maltreated him in sucha fashion that probably by this time he is dead?  Will you tellme that they did not lay siege to the hotel of the Duc de laTremouille, and that they did not endeavor to burn it?--whichwould not, perhaps, have been a great misfortune in time of war,seeing that it is nothing but a nest of Huguenots, but which is,in time of peace, a frightful example.  Tell me, now, can youdeny all this?"

    "And who told you this fine story, sire?" asked Treville,quietly.

    "Who has told me this fine story, monsieur?  Who should it be buthe who watches while I sleep, who labors while I amuse myself,who conducts everything at home and abroad--in France as inEurope?"

    "Your Majesty probably refers to God," said M. de Treville; "forI know no one except God who can be so far above your Majesty.""No, monsieur; I speak of the prop of the state, of my onlyservant, of my only friend--of the cardinal."

    "His Eminence is not his holiness, sire."

    "What do you mean by that, monsieur?"

    "That it is only the Pope who is infallible, and that thisinfallibility does not extend to cardinals."

    "You mean to say that he deceives me; you mean to say that hebetrays me?  You accuse him, then?  Come, speak; avow freely thatyou accuse him!"

    "No, sire, but I say that he deceives himself.  I say that he isill-informed.  I say that he has hastily accused your Majesty'sMusketeers, toward whom he is unjust, and that he has notobtained his information from good sources."

    "The accusation comes from Monsieur de la Tremouille, from theduke himself.  What do you say to that?"

    "I might answer, sire, that he is too deeply interested in thequestion to be a very impartial witness; but so far from that,sire, I know the duke to be a royal gentleman, and I refer thematter to him--but upon one condition, sire."

    "What?"

    "It is that your Majesty will make him come here, willinterrogate him yourself, TETE-A-TETE, without witnesses, andthat I shall see your Majesty as soon as you have seen the duke.""What, then!  You will bind yourself," cried the king, "by whatMonsieur de la Tremouille shall say?"

    "Yes, sire."

    "You will accept his judgment?"

    "Undoubtedly."

    "Any you will submit to the reparation he may require?""Certainly."

    "La Chesnaye," said the king.  "La Chesnaye!"

    Louis XIII's confidential valet, who never left the door, enteredin reply to the call.

    "La Chesnaye," said the king, "let someone go instantly and findMonsieur de la Tremouille; I wish to speak with him thisevening."

    "Your Majesty gives me your word that you will not see anyonebetween Monsieur de la Tremouille and myself?"

    "Nobody, by the faith of a gentleman."

    "Tomorrow, then, sire?"

    "Tomorrow, monsieur."

    "At what o'clock, please your Majesty?"

    "At any hour you will."

    "But in coming too early I should be afraid of awakening yourMajesty."

    "Awaken me!  Do you think I ever sleep, then?  I sleep no longer,monsieur.  I sometimes dream, that's all.  Come, then, as earlyas you like--at seven o'clock; but beware, if you and yourMusketeers are guilty."

    "If my Musketeers are guilty, sire, the guilty shall be placed inyour Majesty's hands, who will dispose of them at your goodpleasure.  Does your Majesty require anything further?  Speak, Iam ready to obey."

    "No, monsieur, no; I am not called Louis the Just without reason.Tomorrow, then, monsieur--tomorrow."

    "Till then, God preserve your Majesty!"

    However ill the king might sleep, M. de Treville slept stillworse.  He had ordered his three Musketeers and their companionto be with him at half past six in the morning.  He took themwith him, without encouraging them or promising them anything,and without concealing from them that their luck, and even hisown, depended upon the cast of the dice.

    Arrived at the foot of the back stairs, he desired them to wait.If the king was still irritated against them, they would departwithout being seen; if the king consented to see them, they wouldonly have to be called.

    On arriving at the king's private antechamber, M. de Trevillefound La Chesnaye, who informed him that they had not been ableto find M. de la Tremouille on the preceding evening at hishotel, that he returned too late to present himself at theLouvre, that he had only that moment arrived and that he was atthat very hour with the king.

    This circumstance pleased M. de Treville much, as he thus becamecertain that no foreign suggestion could insinuate itself betweenM. de la Tremouille's testimony and himself.

    In fact, ten minutes had scarcely passed away when the door ofthe king's closet opened, and M. de Treville saw M. de laTremouille come out.  The duke came straight up to him, and said:"Monsieur de Treville, his Majesty has just sent for me in orderto inquire respecting the circumstances which took placeyesterday at my hotel.  I have told him the truth; that is tosay, that the fault lay with my people, and that I was ready tooffer you my excuses.  Since I have the good fortune to meet you,I beg you to receive them, and to hold me always as one of yourfriends."

    "Monsieur the Duke," said M. de Treville, "I was so confident ofyour loyalty that I required no other defender before his Majestythan yourself.  I find that I have not been mistaken, and I thankyou that there is still one man in France of whom may be said,without disappointment, what I have said of you.""That's well said," cried the king, who had heard all thesecompliments through the open door; "only tell him, Treville,since he wishes to be considered your friend, that I also wish tobe one of his, but he neglects me; that it is nearly three yearssince I have seen him, and that I never do see him unless I sendfor him.  Tell him all this for me, for these are things which aking cannot say for himself."

    "Thanks, sire, thanks," said the duke; "but your Majesty may beassured that it is not those--I do not speak of Monsieur deTreville--whom your Majesty sees at all hours of the day that aremost devoted to you."

    "Ah!  You have heard what I said?  So much the better, Duke, somuch the better," said the king, advancing toward the door.  "Ah!It is you, Treville.  Where are your Musketeers?  I told you theday before yesterday to bring them with you; why have you notdone so?"

    "They are below, sire, and with your permission La Chesnaye willbid them come up."

    "Yes, yes, let them come up immediately.  It is nearly eighto'clock, and at nine I expect a visit.  Go, Monsieur Duke, andreturn often.  Come in, Treville."

    The Duke saluted and retired.  At the moment he opened the door,the three Musketeers and D'Artagnan, conducted by La Chesnaye,appeared at the top of the staircase.

    "Come in, my braves," said the king, "come in; I am going toscold you."

    The Musketeers advanced, bowing, D'Artagnan following closelybehind them.

    "What the devil!" continued the king.  "Seven of his Eminence'sGuards placed HORS DE COMBAT by you four in two days!  That's toomany, gentlemen, too many!  If you go on so, his Eminence will beforced to renew his company in three weeks, and I to put theedicts in force in all their rigor.  One now and then I don't saymuch about; but seven in two days, I repeat, it is too many, itis far too many!"

    "Therefore, sire, your Majesty sees that they are come, quitecontrite and repentant, to offer you their excuses.""Quite contrite and repentant!  Hem!" said the king.  "I place noconfidence in their hypocritical faces.  In particular, there isone yonder of a Gascon look.  Come hither, monsieur."D'Artagnan, who understood that it was to him this compliment wasaddressed, approached, assuming a most deprecating air."Why you told me he was a young man?  This is a boy, Treville, amere boy!  Do you mean to say that it was he who bestowed thatsevere thrust at Jussac?"

    "And those two equally fine thrusts at Bernajoux.""Truly!"

    "Without reckoning," said Athos, "that if he had not rescued mefrom the hands of Cahusac, I should not now have the honor ofmaking my very humble reverence to your Majesty.""Why he is a very devil, this Bearnais!  VENTRE-SAINT-GRIS,Monsieur de Treville, as the king my father would have said.  Butat this sort of work, many doublets must be slashed and manyswords broken.  Now, Gascons are always poor, are they not?""Sire, I can assert that they have hitherto discovered no goldmines in their mountains; though the Lord owes them this miraclein recompense for the manner in which they supported thepretensions of the king your father."

    "Which is to say that the Gascons made a king of me, myself,seeing that I am my father's son, is it not, Treville?  Well,happily, I don't say nay to it.  La Chesnaye, go and see if byrummaging all my pockets you can find forty pistoles; and if youcan find them, bring them to me.  And now let us see, young man,with your hand upon your conscience, how did all this come topass?"

    D'Artagnan related the adventure of the preceding day in all itsdetails; how, not having been able to sleep for the joy he feltin the expectation of seeing his Majesty, he had gone to histhree friends three hours before the hour of audience; how theyhad gone together to the tennis court, and how, upon the fear hehad manifested lest he receive a ball in the face, he had beenjeered at by Bernajoux who had nearly paid for his jeer with hislife and M. de la Tremouille, who had nothing to do with thematter, with the loss of his hotel.

    "This is all very well," murmured the king, "yes, this is justthe account the duke gave me of the affair.  Poor cardinal!Seven men in two days, and those of his very best!  But that'squite enough, gentlemen; please to understand, that's enough.You have taken your revenge for the Rue Ferou, and even exceededit; you ought to be satisfied."

    "If your Majesty is so," said Treville, "we are.""Oh, yes; I am," added the king, taking a handful of gold from LaChesnaye, and putting it into the hand of D'Artagnan.  "Here,"said he, "is a proof of my satisfaction."

    At this epoch, the ideas of pride which are in fashion in ourdays did not prevail.  A gentleman received, from hand to hand,money from the king, and was not the least in the worldhumiliated.  D'Artagnan put his forty pistoles into his pocketwithout any scruple--on the contrary, thanking his Majestygreatly.

    "There," said the king, looking at a clock, "there, now, as it ishalf past eight, you may retire; for as I told you, I expectsomeone at nine.  Thanks for your devotedness, gentlemen.  I maycontinue to rely upon it, may I not?"

    "Oh, sire!" cried the four companions, with one voice, "we wouldallow ourselves to be cut to pieces in your Majesty's service.""Well, well, but keep whole; that will be better, and you will bemore useful to me.  Treville," added the king, in a low voice, asthe others were retiring, "as you have no room in the Musketeers,and as we have besides decided that a novitiate is necessarybefore entering that corps, place this young man in the companyof the Guards of Monsieur Dessessart, your brother-in-law.  Ah,PARDIEU, Treville!  I enjoy beforehand the face the cardinal willmake.  He will be furious; but I don't care.  I am doing what isright."

    The king waved his hand to Treville, who left him and rejoinedthe Musketeers, whom he found sharing the forty pistoles withD'Artagnan.

    The cardinal, as his Majesty had said, was really furious, sofurious that during eight days he absented himself from theking's gaming table.  This did not prevent the king from being ascomplacent to him as possible whenever he met him, or from askingin the kindest tone, "Well, Monsieur Cardinal, how fares it withthat poor Jussac and that poor Bernajoux of yours?"

    7  THE INTERIOR OF "THE MUSKETEERS"

    When D'Artagnan was out of the Louvre, and consulted his friendsupon the use he had best make of his share of the forty pistoles,Athos advised him to order a good repast at the Pomme-de-Pin,Porthos to engage a lackey, and Aramis to provide himself with asuitable mistress.

    The repast was carried into effect that very day, and the lackeywaited at table.  The repast had been ordered by Athos, and thelackey furnished by Porthos.  He was a Picard, whom the gloriousMusketeer had picked up on the Bridge Tournelle, making rings andplashing in the water.

    Porthos pretended that this occupation was proof of a reflectiveand contemplative organization, and he had brought him thisgentleman, for whom he believed himself to be engaged, had wonPlanchet--that was the name of the Picard.  He felt a slightdisappointment, however, when he saw that this place was alreadytaken by a compeer named Mousqueton, and when Porthos signifiedto him that the state of his household, though great, would notsupport two servants, and that he must enter into the service ofD'Artagnan.  Nevertheless, when he waited at the dinner given myhis master, and saw him take out a handful of gold to pay for it,he believed his fortune made, and returned thanks to heaven forhaving thrown him into the service of such a Croesus.  Hepreserved this opinion even after the feast, with the remnants ofwhich he repaired his own long abstinence; but when in theevening he made his master's bed, the chimeras of Planchet fadedaway.  The bed was the only one in the apartment, which consistedof an antechamber and a bedroom.  Planchet slept in theantechamber upon a coverlet taken from the bed of D'Artagnan, andwhich D'Artagnan from that time made shift to do without.Athos, on his part, had a valet whom he had trained in hisservice in a thoroughly peculiar fashion, and who was namedGrimaud.  He was very taciturn, this worthy signor.  Be itunderstood we are speaking of Athos.  During the five or sixyears that he had lived in the strictest intimacy with hiscompanions, Porthos and Aramis, they could remember having oftenseen him smile, but had never heard him laugh.  His words werebrief and expressive, conveying all that was meant, and no more;no embellishments, no embroidery, no arabesques.  Hisconversation a matter of fact, without a single romance.Although Athos was scarcely thirty years old, and was of greatpersonal beauty and intelligence of mind, no one knew whether hehad ever had a mistress.  He never spoke of women.  He certainlydid not prevent others from speaking of them before him, althoughit was easy to perceive that this kind of conversation, in whichhe only mingled by bitter words and misanthropic remarks, wasvery disagreeable to him.  His reserve, his roughness, and hissilence made almost an old man of him.  He had, then, in ordernot to disturb his habits, accustomed Grimaud to obey him upon asimple gesture or upon a simple movement of his lips.  He neverspoke to him, except under the most extraordinary occasions.Sometimes, Grimaud, who feared his master as he did fire, whileentertaining a strong attachment to his person and a greatveneration for his talents, believed he perfectly understood whathe wanted, flew to execute the order received, and did preciselythe contrary.  Athos then shrugged his shoulders, and, withoutputting himself in a passion, thrashed Grimaud.  On these days hespoke a little.

    Porthos, as we have seen, had a character exactly opposite tothat of Athos.  He not only talked much, but he talked loudly,little caring, we must render him that justice, whether anybodylistened to him or not.  He talked for the pleasure of talkingand for the pleasure of hearing himself talk.  He spoke upon allsubjects except the sciences, alleging in this respect theinveterate hatred he had borne to scholars from his childhood.He had not so noble an air as Athos, and the commencement oftheir intimacy often rendered him unjust toward that gentleman,whom he endeavored to eclipse by his splendid dress.  But withhis simple Musketeer's uniform and nothing but the manner inwhich he threw back his head and advanced his foot, Athosinstantly took the place which was his due and consigned theostentatious Porthos to the second rank.  Porthos consoledhimself by filling the antechamber of M. de Treville and theguardroom of the Louvre with the accounts of his love scrapes,after having passed from professional ladies to military ladies,from the lawyer's dame to the baroness, there was question ofnothing less with Porthos than a foreign princess, who wasenormously fond of him.

    An old proverb says, "Like master, like man."  Let us pass, then,from the valet of Athos to the valet of Porthos, from Grimaud toMousqueton.

    Mousqueton was a Norman, whose pacific name of Boniface hismaster had changed into the infinitely more sonorous name ofMousqueton.  He had entered the service of Porthos upon conditionthat he should only be clothed and lodged, though in a handsomemanner; but he claimed two hours a day to himself, consecrated toan employment which would provide for his other wants.  Porthosagreed to the bargain; the thing suited him wonderfully well.  Hehad doublets cut out of his old clothes and cast-off cloaks forMousqueton, and thanks to a very intelligent tailor, who made hisclothes look as good as new by turning them, and whose wife wassuspected of wishing to make Porthos descend from hisaristocratic habits, Mousqueton made a very good figure whenattending on his master.

    As for Aramis, of whom we believe we have sufficiently explainedthe character--a character which, like that of his lackey wascalled Bazin.  Thanks to the hopes which his master entertainedof someday entering into orders, he was always clothed in black,as became the servant of a churchman.  He was a Berrichon,thirty-five or forty years old, mild, peaceable, sleek, employingthe leisure his master left him in the perusal of pious works,providing rigorously for two a dinner of few dishes, butexcellent.  For the rest, he was dumb, blind, and deaf, and ofunimpeachable fidelity.

    And now that we are acquainted, superficially at least, with themasters and the valets, let us pass on to the dwellings occupiedby each of them.

    Athos dwelt in the Rue Ferou, within two steps of the Luxembourg.His apartment consisted of two small chambers, very nicely fittedup, in a furnished house, the hostess of which, still young andstill really handsome, cast tender glances uselessly at him.Some fragments of past splendor appeared here and there upon thewalls of this modest lodging; a sword, for example, richlyembossed, which belonged by its make to the times of Francis I,the hilt of which alone, encrusted with precious stones, might beworth two hundred pistoles, and which, nevertheless, in hismoments of greatest distress Athos had never pledged or offeredfor sale.  It had long been an object of ambition for Porthos.Porthos would have given ten years of his life to possess thissword.

    One day, when he had an appointment with a duchess, he endeavoredeven to borrow it of Athos.  Athos, without saying anything,emptied his pockets, got together all his jewels, purses,aiguillettes, and gold chains, and offered them all to Porthos;but as to the sword, he said it was sealed to its place andshould never quit it until its master should himself quit hislodgings.  In addition to the sword, there was a portraitrepresenting a nobleman of the time of Henry III, dressed withthe greatest elegance, and who wore the Order of the Holy Ghost;and this portrait had certain resemblances of lines with Athos,certain family likenesses which indicated that this great noble,a knight of the Order of the King, was his ancestor.Besides these, a casket of magnificent goldwork, with the samearms as the sword and the portrait, formed a middle ornament tothe mantelpiece, and assorted badly with the rest of thefurniture.  Athos always carried the key of this coffer abouthim; but he one day opened it before Porthos, and Porthos wasconvinced that this coffer contained nothing but letters andpapers--love letters and family papers, no doubt.Porthos lived in an apartment, large in size and of verysumptuous appearance, in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier.  Every timehe passed with a friend before his windows, at one of whichMousqueton was sure to be placed in full livery, Porthos raisedhis head and his hand, and said, "That is my abode!"  But he wasnever to be found at home; he never invited anybody to go up withhim, and no one could form an idea of what his sumptuousapartment contained in the shape of real riches.

    As to Aramis, he dwelt in a little lodging composed of a boudoir,an eating room, and a bedroom, which room, situated, as theothers were, on the ground floor, looked out upon a little freshgreen garden, shady and impenetrable to the eyes of hisneighbors.

    With regard to D'Artagnan, we know how he was lodged, and we havealready made acquaintance with his lackey, Master Planchet.D'Artagnan, who was by nature very curious--as people generallyare who possess the genius of intrigue--did all he could to makeout who Athos, Porthos, and Aramis really were (for under thesepseudonyms each of these young men concealed his family name)--Athos in particular, who, a league away, savored of nobility.  Headdressed himself then to Porthos to gain information respectingAthos and Aramis, and to Aramis in order to learn something ofPorthos.

    Unfortunately Porthos knew nothing of the life of his silentcompanion but what revealed itself.  It was said Athos had metwith great crosses in love, and that a frightful treachery hadforever poisoned the life of this gallant man.  What could thistreachery be?  All the world was ignorant of it.

    As to Porthos, except his real name (as was the case with thoseof his two comrades), his life was very easily known.  Vain andindiscreet, it was as easy to see through him as through acrystal.  The only thing to mislead the investigator would havebeen belief in all the good things he said of himself.With respect to Aramis, though having the air of having nothingsecret about him, he was a young fellow made up of mysteries,answering little to questions put to him about others, and havinglearned from him the report which prevailed concerning thesuccess of the Musketeer with a princess, wished to gain a littleinsight into the amorous adventures of his interlocutor.  "Andyou, my dear companion," said he, "you speak of the baronesses,countesses, and princesses of others?"

    "PARDIEU!  I spoke of them because Porthos talked of themhimself, because he had paraded all these fine things before me.But be assured, my dear Monsieur D'Artagnan, that if I hadobtained them from any other source, or if they had been confidedto me, there exists no confessor more discreet than myself.""Oh, I don't doubt that," replied D'Artagnan; "but it seems to methat you are tolerably familiar with coats of arms--a certainembroidered handkerchief, for instance, to which I owe the honorof your acquaintance?"

    This time Aramis was not angry, but assumed the most modest airand replied in a friendly tone, "My dear friend, do not forgetthat I wish to belong to the Church, and that I avoid all mundaneopportunities.  The handkerchief you saw had not been given tome, but it had been forgotten and left at my house by one of myfriends.  I was obliged to pick it up in order not to compromisehim and the lady he loves.  As for myself, I neither have, nordesire to have, a mistress, following in that respect the veryjudicious example of Athos, who has none any more than I have.""But what the devil!  You are not a priest, you are a Musketeer!""A Musketeer for a time, my friend, as the cardinal says, aMusketeer against my will, but a churchman at heart, believe me.Athos and Porthos dragged me into this to occupy me.  I had, atthe moment of being ordained, a little difficulty with--But thatwould not interest you, and I am taking up your valuable time.""Not at all; it interests me very much," cried D'Artagnan; "andat this moment I have absolutely nothing to do."

    "Yes, but I have my breviary to repeat," answered Aramis; "thensome verses to compose, which Madame d'Aiguillon begged of me.Then I must go to the Rue St. Honore in order to purchase somerouge for Madame de Chevreuse.  So you see, my dear friend, thatif you are not in a hurry, I am very much in a hurry."Aramis held out his hand in a cordial manner to his youngcompanion, and took leave of him.

    Notwithstanding all the pains he took, D'Artagnan was unable tolearn any more concerning his three new-made friends.  He formed,therefore, the resolution of believing for the present all thatwas said of their past, hoping for more certain and extendedrevelations in the future.  In the meanwhile, he looked uponAthos as an Achilles, Porthos as an Ajax, and Aramis as a Joseph.As to the rest, the life of the four young friends was joyousenough.  Athos played, and that as a rule unfortunately.Nevertheless, he never borrowed a sou of his companions, althoughhis purse was ever at their service; and when he had played uponhonor, he always awakened his creditor by six o'clock the nextmorning to pay the debt of the preceding evening.Porthos had his fits.  On the days when he won he was insolentand ostentatious; if he lost, he disappeared completely forseveral days, after which he reappeared with a pale face andthinner person, but with money in his purse.

    As to Aramis, he never played.  He was the worst Musketeer andthe most unconvivial companion imaginable.  He had alwayssomething or other to do.  Sometimes in the midst of dinner, wheneveryone, under the attraction of wine and in the warmth ofconversation, believed they had two or three hours longer toenjoy themselves at table, Aramis looked at his watch, arose witha bland smile, and took leave of the company, to go, as he said,to consult a casuist with whom he had an appointment.  At othertimes he would return home to write a treatise, and requested hisfriends not to disturb him.

    At this Athos would smile, with his charming, melancholy smile,which so became his noble countenance, and Porthos would drink,swearing that Aramis would never be anything but a village CURE.Planchet, D'Artagnan's valet, supported his good fortune nobly.He received thirty sous per day, and for a month he returned tohis lodgings gay as a chaffinch, and affable toward his master.When the wind of adversity began to blow upon the housekeeping ofthe Rue des Fossoyeurs--that is to say, when the forty pistolesof King Louis XIII were consumed or nearly so--he commencedcomplaints which Athos thought nauseous, Porthos indecent, andAramis ridiculous.  Athos counseled D'Artagnan to dismiss thefellow; Porthos was of opinion that he should give him a goodthrashing first; and Aramis contended that a master should neverattend to anything but the civilities paid to him."This is all very easy for you to say," replied D'Artagnan, "foryou, Athos, who live like a dumb man with Grimaud, who forbid himto speak, and consequently never exchange ill words with him; foryou, Porthos, who carry matters in such a magnificent style, andare a god to your valet, Mousqueton; and for you, Aramis, who,always abstracted by your theological studies, inspire yourservant, Bazin, a mild, religious man, with a profound respect;but for me, who am without any settled means and withoutresources--for me, who am neither a Musketeer nor even aGuardsman, what I am to do to inspire either the affection, theterror, or the respect in Planchet?"

    "This is serious," answered the three friends; "it is a familyaffair.  It is with valets as with wives, they must be placed atonce upon the footing in which you wish them to remain.  Reflectupon it."

    D'Artagnan did reflect, and resolved to thrash Planchetprovisionally; which he did with the conscientiousness thatD'Artagnan carried into everything.  After having well beatenhim, he forbade him to leave his service without his permission."For," added he, "the future cannot fail to mend; I inevitablylook for better times.  Your fortune is therefore made if youremain with me, and I am too good a master to allow you to misssuch a chance by granting you the dismissal you require."This manner of acting roused much respect for D'Artagnan's policyamong the Musketeers.  Planchet was equally seized withadmiration, and said no more about going away.

    The life of the four young men had become fraternal.  D'Artagnan,who had no settled habits of his own, as he came from hisprovince into the midst of his world quite new to him, felleasily into the habits of his friends.

    They rose about eight o'clock in the winter, about six in summer,and went to take the countersign and see how things went on at M.de Treville's.  D'Artagnan, although he was not a Musketeer,performed the duty of one with remarkable punctuality.  He wenton guard because he always kept company with whoever of hisfriends was on duty.  He was well known at the Hotel of theMusketeers, where everyone considered him a good comrade.  M. deTreville, who had appreciated him at the first glance and whobore him a real affection, never ceased recommending him to theking.

    On their side, the three Musketeers were much attached to theiryoung comrade.  The friendship which united these four men, andthe want they felt of seeing another three or four times a day,whether for dueling, business, or pleasure, caused them to becontinually running after one another like shadows; and theInseparables were constantly to be met with seeking one another,from the Luxembourg to the Place St. Sulpice, or from the Rue duVieux-Colombier to the Luxembourg.

    In the meanwhile the promises of M. de Treville went onprosperously.  One fine morning the king commanded M. deChevalier Dessessart to admit D'Artagnan as a cadet in hiscompany of Guards.  D'Artagnan, with a sigh, donned his uniform,which he would have exchanged for that of a Musketeer at theexpense of ten years of his existence.  But M. de Trevillepromised this favor after a novitiate of two years--a novitiatewhich might besides be abridged if an opportunity should presentitself for D'Artagnan to render the king any signal service, orto distinguish himself by some brilliant action.  Upon thispromise D'Artagnan withdrew, and the next day he began service.Then it became the turn of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis to mountguard with D'Artagnan when he was on duty.  The company of M. leChevalier Dessessart thus received four instead of one when itadmitted D'Artagnan.

    8  CONCERNING A COURT INTRIGUE

    In the meantime, the forty pistoles of King Louis XIII, like allother things of this world, after having had a beginning had anend, and after this end our four companions began to be somewhatembarrassed.  At first, Athos supported the association for atime with his own means.

    Porthos succeeded him; and thanks to one of those disappearancesto which he was accustomed, he was able to provide for the wantsof all for a fortnight.  At last it became Aramis's turn, whoperformed it with a good grace and who succeeded--as he said, byselling some theological books--in procuring a few pistoles.Then, as they had been accustomed to do, they had recourse to M.de Treville, who made some advances on their pay; but theseadvances could not go far with three Musketeers who were alreadymuch in arrears and a Guardsman who as yet had no pay at all.At length when they found they were likely to be really in want,they got together, as a last effort, eight or ten pistoles, withwhich Porthos went to the gaming table.  Unfortunately he was ina bad vein; he lost all, together with twenty-five pistoles forwhich he had given his word.

    Then the inconvenience became distress.  The hungry friends,followed by their lackeys, were seen haunting the quays and Guardrooms, picking up among their friends abroad all the dinners theycould meet with; for according to the advice of Aramis, it wasprudent to sow repasts right and left in prosperity, in order toreap a few in time of need.

    Athos was invited four times, and each time took his friends andtheir lackeys with him.  Porthos had six occasions, and contrivedin the same manner that his friends should partake of them;Aramis had eight of them.  He was a man, as must have beenalready perceived, who made but little noise, and yet was muchsought after.

    As to D'Artagnan, who as yet knew nobody in the capital, he onlyfound one chocolate breakfast at the house of a priest of his ownprovince, and one dinner at the house of a cornet of the Guards.He took his army to the priest's, where they devoured as muchprovision as would have lasted him for two months, and to thecornet's, who performed wonders; but as Planchet said, "People donot eat at once for all time, even when they eat a good deal."D'Artagnan thus felt himself humiliated in having only procuredone meal and a half for his companions--as the breakfast at thepriest's could only be counted as half a repast--in return forthe feasts which Athos, Porthos, and Aramis had procured him.  Hefancied himself a burden to the society, forgetting in hisperfectly juvenile good faith that he had fed this society for amonth; and he set his mind actively to work.  He reflected thatthis coalition of four young, brave, enterprising, and active menought to have some other object than swaggering walks, fencinglessons, and practical jokes, more or less witty.In fact, four men such as they were--four men devoted to oneanother, from their purses to their lives; four men alwayssupporting one another, never yielding, executing singly ortogether the resolutions formed in common; four arms threateningthe four cardinal points, or turning toward a single point--mustinevitably, either subterraneously, in open day, by mining, inthe trench, by cunning, or by force, open themselves a way towardthe object they wished to attain, however well it might bedefended, or however distant it may seem.  The only thing thatastonished D'Artagnan was that his friends had never thought ofthis.

    He was thinking by himself, and even seriously racking his brainto find a direction for this single force four times multiplied,with which he did not doubt, as with the lever for whichArchimedes sought, they should succeed in moving the world, whensomeone tapped gently at his door.  D'Artagnan awakened Planchetand ordered him to open it.

    >From this phrase, "D'Artagnan awakened Planchet," the reader mustnot suppose it was night, or that day was hardly come.  No, ithad just struck four.  Planchet, two hours before, had asked hismaster for some dinner, and he had answered him with the proverb,"He who sleeps, dines."  And Planchet dined by sleeping.A man was introduced of simple mien, who had the appearance of atradesman.  Planchet, by way of dessert, would have liked to hearthe conversation; but the citizen declared to D'Artagnan thatwhat he had to say being important and confidential, he desiredto be left alone with him.

    D'Artagnan dismissed Planchet, and requested his visitor to beseated.  There was a moment of silence, during which the two menlooked at each other, as if to make a preliminary acquaintance,after which D'Artagnan bowed, as a sign that he listened."I have heard Monsieur d'Artagnan spoken of as a very brave youngman," said the citizen; "and this reputation which he justlyenjoys had decided me to confide a secret to him.""Speak, monsieur, speak," said D'Artagnan, who instinctivelyscented something advantageous.

    The citizen made a fresh pause and continued, "I have a wife whois seamstress to the queen, monsieur, and who is not deficient ineither virtue or beauty.  I was induced to marry her about threeyears ago, although she had but very little dowry, becauseMonsieur Laporte, the queen's cloak bearer, is her godfather, andbefriends her."

    "Well, monsieur?" asked D'Artagnan.

    "Well!" resumed the citizen, "well, monsieur, my wife wasabducted yesterday morning, as she was coming out of herworkroom."

    "And by whom was your wife abducted?"

    "I know nothing surely, monsieur, but I suspect someone.""And who is the person whom you suspect?"

    "A man who has persued her a long time."

    "The devil!"

    "But allow me to tell you, monsieur," continued the citizen,"that I am convinced that there is less love than politics in allthis."

    "Less love than politics," replied D'Artagnan, with a reflectiveair; "and what do you suspect?"

    "I do not know whether I ought to tell you what I suspect.""Monsieur, I beg you to observe that I ask you absolutelynothing.  It is you who have come to me.  It is you who have toldme that you had a secret to confide in me.  Act, then, as youthink proper; there is still time to withdraw."

    "No, monsieur, no; you appear to be an honest young man, and Iwill have confidence in you.  I believe, then, that it is not onaccount of any intrigues of her own that my wife has beenarrested, but because of those of a lady much greater thanherself."

    "Ah, ah!  Can it be on account of the amours of Madame deBois-Tracy?" said D'Artagnan, wishing to have the air, in theeyes of the citizen, of being posted as to court affairs.""Higher, monsieur, higher."

    "Of Madame d'Aiguillon?"

    "Still higher."

    "Of Madame de Chevreuse?"

    "Of the--" D'Artagnan checked himself.

    "Yes, monsieur," replied the terrified citizen, in a tone so lowthat he was scarcely audible.

    "And with whom?"

    "With whom can it be, if not the Duke of--"

    "The Duke of--"

    "Yes, monsieur," replied the citizen, giving a still fainterintonation to his voice.

    "But how do you know all this?"

    "How do I know it?"

    "Yes, how do you know it?  No half-confidence, or--you understand!""I know it from my wife, monsieur--from my wife herself.""Who learns it from whom?"

    "From Monsieur Laporte.  Did I not tell you that she was thegoddaughter of Monsieur Laporte, the confidential man of thequeen?  Well, Monsieur Laporte placed her near her Majesty inorder that our poor queen might at least have someone in whom shecould place confidence, abandoned as she is by the king, watchedas she is by the cardinal, betrayed as she is by everybody.""Ah, ah!  It begins to develop itself," said D'Artagnan."Now, my wife came home four days ago, monsieur.  One of herconditions was that she should come and see me twice a week; for,as I had the honor to tell you, my wife loves me dearly--my wife,then, came and confided to me that the queen at that very momententertained great fears."

    "Truly!"

    "Yes.  The cardinal, as it appears, pursues he and persecutes hermore than ever.  He cannot pardon her the history of theSaraband.  You know the history of the Saraband?""PARDIEU!  Know it!" replied D'Artagnan, who knew nothing aboutit, but who wished to appear to know everything that was goingon.

    "So that now it is no longer hatred, but vengeance.""Indeed!"

    "And the queen believes--"

    "Well, what does the queen believe?"

    "She believes that someone has written to the Duke of Buckinghamin her name."

    "In the queen's name?"

    "Yes, to make him come to Paris; and when once come to Paris, todraw him into some snare."

    "The devil!  But your wife, monsieur, what has she to do with allthis?"

    "Her devotion to the queen is known; and they wish either toremove her from her mistress, or to intimidate her, in order toobtain her Majesty's secrets, or to seduce her and make use ofher as a spy."

    "That is likely," said D'Artagnan; "but the man who has abductedher--do you know him?"

    "I have told you that I believe I know him."

    "His name?"

    "I do not know that; what I do know is that he is a creature ofthe cardinal, his evil genius."

    "But you have seen him?"

    "Yes, my wife pointed him out to me one day."

    'Has he anything remarkable about him by which one may recognizehim?"

    "Oh, certainly; he is a noble of very lofty carriage, black hair,swarthy complexion, piercing eye, white teeth, and has a scar onhis temple."

    "A scar on his temple!" cried D'Artagnan; "and with that, whiteteeth, a piercing eye, dark complexion, black hair, and haughtycarriage--why, that's my man of Meung."

    "He is your man, do you say?"

    "Yes, yes; but that has nothing to do with it.  No, I am wrong.On the contrary, that simplifies the matter greatly.  If your manis mine, with one blow I shall obtain two revenges, that's all;but where to find this man?"

    "I know not."

    "Have you no information as to his abiding place?""None.  One day, as I was conveying my wife back to the Louvre,he was coming out as she was going in, and she showed him to me.""The devil!  The devil!" murmured D'Artagnan; "all this is vagueenough.  From whom have you learned of the abduction of yourwife?"

    "From Monsieur Laporte."

    "Did he give you any details?"

    "He knew none himself."

    "And you have learned nothing from any other quarter?""Yes, I have received--"

    "What?"

    "I fear I am committing a great imprudence."

    "You always come back to that; but I must make you see this timethat it is too late to retreat."

    "I do not retreat, MORDIEU!" cried the citizen, swearing in orderto rouse his courage.  "Besides, by the faith of Bonacieux--""You call yourself Bonacieux?" interrupted D'Artagnan."Yes, that is my name."

    "You said, then, by the word of Bonacieux.  Pardon me forinterrupting you, but it appears to me that that name is familiarto me."

    "Possibly, monsieur. I am your landlord."

    "Ah, ah!" said D'Artagnan, half rising and bowing; "you are mylandlord?"

    "Yes, monsieur, yes.  And as it is three months since you havebeen here, and though, distracted as you must be in yourimportant occupations, you have forgotten to pay me my rent--as,I say, I have not tormented you a single instant, I thought youwould appreciate my delicacy."

    "How can it be otherwise, my dear Bonacieux?" replied D'Artagnan;"trust me, I am fully grateful for such unparalleled conduct, andif, as I told you, I can be of any service to you--""I believe you, monsieur, I believe you; and as I was about tosay, by the word of Bonacieux, I have confidence in you.""Finish, then, what you were about to say."

    The citizen took a paper from his pocket, and presented it toD'Artagnan.

    "A letter?" said the young man.

    "Which I received this morning."

    D'Artagnan opened it, and as the day was beginning to decline, heapproached the window to read it.  The citizen followed him."'Do not seek your wife,'" read D'Artagnan; "'she will berestored to you when there is no longer occasion for her. If youmake a single step to find her you are lost.'

    "That's pretty positive," continued D'Artagnan; "but after all,it is but a menace."

    "Yes; but that menace terrifies me.  I am not a fighting man atall, monsieur, and I am afraid of the Bastille."

    "Hum!" said D'Artagnan.  "I have no greater regard for theBastille than you.  If it were nothing but a sword thrust, whythen--"

    "I have counted upon you on this occasion, monsieur.""Yes?"

    "Seeing you constantly surrounded by Musketeers of a very superbappearance, and knowing that these Musketeers belong to Monsieurde Treville, and were consequently enemies of the cardinal, Ithought that you and your friends, while rendering justice toyour poor queen, would be pleased to play his Eminence an illturn."

    "Without doubt."

    "And then I have thought that considering three months' lodging,about which I have said nothing--"

    "Yes, yes; you have already given me that reason, and I find itexcellent."

    "Reckoning still further, that as long as you do me the honor toremain in my house I shall never speak to you about rent--""Very kind!"

    "And adding to this, if there be need of it, meaning to offer youfifty pistoles, if, against all probability, you should be shortat the present moment."

    "Admirable!  You are rich then, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux?""I am comfortably off, monsieur, that's all; I have scrapedtogether some such thing as an income of two or three thousandcrown in the haberdashery business, but more particularly inventuring some funds in the last voyage of the celebratednavigator Jean Moquet; so that you understand, monsieur--But"cried the citizen.

    "What!" demanded D'Artagnan.

    "Whom do I see yonder?"

    "Where?"

    "In the street, facing your window, in the embrasure of thatdoor--a man wrapped in a cloak."

    "It is he!" cried D'Artagnan and the citizen at the same time,each having recognized his man.

    "Ah, this time," cried D'Artagnan, springing to his sword, "thistime he will not escape me!"

    Drawing his sword from its scabbard, he rushed out of theapartment.  On the staircase he met Athos and Porthos, who werecoming to see him.  They separated, and D'Artagnan rushed betweenthem like a dart.

    "Pah!  Where are you going?" cried the two Musketeers in a breath."The man of Meung!" replied D'Artagnan, and disappeared.D'Artagnan had more than once related to his friends hisadventure with the stranger, as well as the apparition of thebeautiful foreigner, to whom this man had confided some importantmissive.

    The opinion of Athos was that D'Artagnan had lost his letter inthe skirmish.  A gentleman, in his opinion--and according toD'Artagnan's portrait of him, the stranger must be a gentleman--would be incapable of the baseness of stealing a letter.Porthos saw nothing in all this but a love meeting, given by alady to a cavalier, or by a cavalier to a lady, which had beendisturbed by the presence of D'Artagnan and his yellow horse.Aramis said that as these sorts of affairs were mysterious, itwas better not to fathom them.

    They understood, then, from the few words which escaped fromD'Artagnan, what affair was in hand, and as they thought thatovertaking his man, or losing sight of him, D'Artagnan wouldreturn to his rooms, they kept on their way.

    When they entered D'Artagan's chamber, it was empty; thelandlord, dreading the consequences of the encounter which wasdoubtless about to take place between the young man and thestranger, had, consistent with the character he had givenhimself, judged it prudent to decamp.

    9  D'ARTAGNAN SHOWS HIMSELF

    As Athos and Porthos had foreseen, at the expiration of a halfhour, D'Artagnan returned.  He had again missed his man, who haddisappeared as if by enchantment.  D'Artagnan had run, sword inhand, through all the neighboring streets, but had found nobodyresembling the man he sought for.  Then he came back to the pointwhere, perhaps, he ought to have begun, and that was to knock atthe door against which the stranger had leaned; but this proveduseless--for though he knocked ten or twelve times in succession,no one answered, and some of the neighbors, who put their nosesout of their windows or were brought to their doors by the noise,had assured him that that house, all the openings of which weretightly closed, had not been inhabited for six months.While D'Artagnan was running through the streets and knocking atdoors, Aramis had joined his companions; so that on returning himD'Artagnan found the reunion complete.

    "Well!" cried the three Musketeers all together, on seeingD'Artagnan enter with his brow covered with perspiration and hiscountenance upset with anger.

    "Well!" cried he, throwing his sword upon the bed, "this man mustbe the devil in person; he has disappeared like a phantom, like a shade, like a specter.""Do you believe in apparitions?" asked Athos of Porthos."I never believe in anything I have not seen, and as I never haveseen apparitions, I don't believe in them."

    "The Bible," said Aramis, "make our belief in them a law; theghost of Samuel appeared to Saul, and it is an article of faiththat I should be very sorry to see any doubt thrown upon,Porthos."

    "At all events, man or devil, body or shadow, illusion orreality, this man is born for my damnation; for his flight hascaused us to miss a glorious affair, gentlemen--an affair bywhich there were a hundred pistoles, and perhaps more, to begained."

    "How is that?" cried Porthos and Aramis in a breath.As to Athos, faithful to his system of reticence, he contentedhimself with interrogating D'Artagnan by a look.

    "Planchet," said D'Artagnan to his domestic, who just theninsinuated his head through the half-open door in order to catchsome fragments of the conversation, "go down to my landlord,Monsieur Bonacieux, and ask him to send me half a dozen bottlesof Beaugency wine; I prefer that."

    "Ah, ah!  You have credit with your landlord, then?" askedPorthos.

    "Yes," replied D'Artagnan, "from this very day; and mind, if thewine is bad, we will send him to find better."

    "We must use, and not abuse," said Aramis, sententiously."I always said that D'Artagnan had the longest head of the four,"said Athos, who, having uttered his opinion, to which D'Artagnanreplied with a bow, immediately resumed his accustomed silence."But come, what is this about?" asked Porthos.

    "Yes," said Aramis, "impart it to us, my dear friend, unless thehonor of any lady be hazarded by this confidence; in that caseyou would do better to keep it to yourself."

    "Be satisfied," replied D'Artagnan; "the honor of no one willhave cause to complain of what I have to tell.

    He then related to his friends, word for word, all that hadpassed between him and his host, and how the man who had abductedthe wife of his worthy landlord was the same with whom he had hadthe difference at the hostelry of the Jolly Miller."Your affair is not bad," said Athos, after having tasted like aconnoisseur and indicated by a nod of his head that he thoughtthe wine good; "and one may draw fifty or sixty pistoles fromthis good man.  Then there only remains to ascertain whetherthese fifty or sixty pistoles are worth the risk of four heads.""But observe," cried D'Artagnan, "that there is a woman in theaffair--a woman carried off, a woman who is doubtless threatened,tortured perhaps, and all because she is faithful to hermistress."

    "Beware, D'Artagnan, beware," said Aramis.  "You grow a littletoo warm, in my opinion, about the fate of Madame Bonacieux.Woman was created for our destruction, and it is from her weinherit all our miseries."

    At this speech of Aramis, the brow of Athos became clouded and hebit his lips.

    "It is not Madame Bonacieux about whom I am anxious," criedD'Artagnan, "but the queen, whom the king abandons, whom thecardinal persecutes, and who sees the heads of all her friendsfall, one after the other."

    "Why does she love what we hate most in the world, the Spaniardsand the English?"

    "Spain is her country," replied D'Artagnan; "and it is verynatural that she should love the Spanish, who are the children ofthe same soil as herself.  As to the second reproach, I haveheard it said that she does not love the English, but anEnglishman."

    "Well, and by my faith," said Athos, "it must be acknowledgedthat this Englishman is worthy of being loved.  I never saw a manwith a nobler air than his."

    "Without reckoning that he dresses as nobody else can," saidPorthos.  "I was at the Louvre on the day when he scattered hispearls; and, PARDIEU, I picked up two that I sold for tenpistoles each.  Do you know him, Aramis?"

    "As well as you do, gentlemen; for I was among those who seizedhim in the garden at Amiens, into which Monsieur Putange, thequeen's equerry, introduced me.  I was at school at the time, andthe adventure appeared to me to be cruel for the king.""Which would not prevent me," said D'Artagnan, "if I knew wherethe Duke of Buckingham was, from taking him by the hand andconducting him to the queen, were it only to enrage the cardinal,and if we could find means to play him a sharp turn, I vow that Iwould voluntarily risk my head in doing it."

    "And did the mercer,"* rejoined Athos, "tell you, D'Artagnan,that the queen thought that Buckingham had been brought over by aforged letter?"

    *Haberdasher

    "She is afraid so."

    "Wait a minute, then," said Aramis.

    "What for?" demanded Porthos.

    "Go on, while I endeavor to recall circumstances.""And now I am convinced," said D'Artagnan, "that this abductionof the queen's woman is connected with the events of which we arespeaking, and perhaps with the presence of Buckingham in Paris.""The Gascon is full of ideas," said Porthos, with admiration."I like to hear him talk," said Athos; "his dialect amuses me.""Gentlemen," cried Aramis, "listen to this."

    "Listen to Aramis," said his three friends.

    "Yesterday I was at the house of a doctor of theology, whom Isometimes consult about my studies."

    Athos smiled.

    "He resides in a quiet quarter," continued Aramis; "his tastesand his profession require it.  Now, at the moment when I lefthis house--"

    Here Aramis paused.

    "Well," cried his auditors; "at the moment you left his house?"Aramis appeared to make a strong inward effort, like a man who,in the full relation of a falsehood, finds himself stopped bysome unforeseen obstacle; but the eyes of his three companionswere fixed upon him, their ears were wide open, and there were nomeans of retreat.

    "This doctor has a niece," continued Aramis.

    "Ah, he has a niece!" interrupted Porthos.

    "A very respectable lady," said Aramis.

    The three friends burst into laughter.

    "Ah, if you laugh, if you doubt me," replied Aramis, "you shallknow nothing."

    "We believe like Mohammedans, and are as mute as tombstones,"said Athos.

    "I will continue, then," resumed Aramis.  "This niece comessometimes to see her uncle; and by chance was there yesterday atthe same time that I was, and it was my duty to offer to conducther to her carriage."

    "Ah!  She has a carriage, then, this niece of the doctor?"interrupted Porthos, one of whose faults was a great looseness oftongue.  "A nice acquaintance, my friend!"

    "Porthos," replied Aramis, "I have had the occasion to observe toyou more than once that you are very indiscreet; and that isinjurious to you among the women."

    "Gentlemen, gentlemen," cried D'Artagnan, who began to get aglimpse of the result of the adventure, "the thing is serious.Let us try not to jest, if we can.  Go on Aramis, go on.""All at once, a tall, dark gentleman--just like yours,D'Artagnan."

    "The same, perhaps," said he.

    "Possibly," continued Aramis, "came toward me, accompanied byfive or six men who followed about ten paces behind him; and inthe politest tone, 'Monsieur Duke,' said he to me, 'and youmadame,' continued he, addressing the lady on my arm--""The doctor's niece?"

    "Hold your tongue, Porthos," said Athos; "you are insupportable.""'--will you enter this carriage, and that without offering theleast resistance, without making the least noise?'""He took you for Buckingham!" cried D'Artagnan.

    "I believe so," replied Aramis.

    "But the lady?" asked Porthos.

    "He took her for the queen!" said D'Artagnan.

    "Just so," replied Aramis.

    "The Gascon is the devil!" cried Athos; "nothing escapes him.""The fact is," said Porthos, "Aramis is of the same height, andsomething of the shape of the duke; but it nevertheless appearsto me that the dress of a Musketeer--"

    "I wore an enormous cloak," said Aramis.

    "In the month of July?  The devil!" said Porthos.  "Is the doctorafraid that you may be recognized?"

    "I can comprehend that the spy may have been deceived by theperson; but the face--"

    "I had a large hat," said Aramis.

    "Oh, good lord," cried Porthos, "what precautions for the studyof theology!"

    "Gentlemen, gentlemen," said D'Artagnan, "do not let us lose ourtime in jesting.  Let us separate, and let us seek the mercer'swife--that is the key of the intrigue."

    "A woman of such inferior condition!  Can you believe so?" saidPorthos, protruding his lips with contempt.

    "She is goddaughter to Laporte, the confidential valet of thequeen.  Have I not told you so, gentlemen?  Besides, it hasperhaps been her Majesty's calculation to seek on this occasionfor support so lowly.  High heads expose themselves from afar,and the cardinal is longsighted."

    "Well," said Porthos, "in the first place make a bargain with themercer, and a good bargain."

    "That's useless," said D'Artagnan; "for I believe if he does notpay us, we shall be well enough paid by another party."At this moment a sudden noise of footsteps was heard upon thestairs; the door was thrown violently open, and the unfortunatemercer rushed into the chamber in which the council was held."Save me, gentlemen, for the love of heaven, save me!" cried he."There are four men come to arrest me.  Save me!  Save me!"Porthos and Aramis arose.

    "A moment," cried D'Artagnan, making them a sign to replace inthe scabbard their half-drawn swords.  "It is not courage that isneeded; it is prudence."

    "And yet," cried Porthos, "we will not leave--"

    "You will leave D'Artagnan to act as he thinks proper," saidAthos.  "He has, I repeat, the longest head of the four, and formy part I declare that I will obey him.  Do as you think best,D'Artagnan."

    At this moment the four Guards appeared at the door of theantechamber, but seeing four Musketeers standing, and theirswords by their sides, they hesitated about going farther."Come in, gentlemen, come in," called D'Artagnan; "you are herein my apartment, and we are all faithful servants of the king andcardinal."

    "Then, gentlemen, you will not oppose our executing the orders wehave received?" asked one who appeared to be the leader of theparty.

    "On the contrary, gentlemen, we would assist you if it werenecessary."

    "What does he say?" grumbled Porthos.

    "You are a simpleton," said Athos.  "Silence!"

    "But you promised me--" whispered the poor mercer."We can only save you by being free ourselves," repliedD'Artagnan, in a rapid, low tone; "and if we appear inclined todefend you, they will arrest us with you."

    "It seems, nevertheless--"

    "Come, gentlemen, come!" said D'Artagnan, aloud; "I have nomotive for defending Monsieur.  I saw him today for the firsttime, and he can tell you on what occasion; he came to demand therent of my lodging.  Is that not true, Monsieur Bonacieux?Answer!"

    "That is the very truth," cried the mercer; "but Monsieur doesnot tell you--"

    "Silence, with respect to me, silence, with respect to myfriends; silence about the queen, above all, or you will ruineverybody without saving yourself!  Come, come, gentlemen, removethe fellow."  And D'Artagnan pushed the half-stupefied merceramong the Guards, saying to him, "You are a shabby old fellow, mydear.  You come to demand money of me--of a Musketeer!  To prisonwith him!  Gentlemen, once more, take him to prison, and keep himunder key as long as possible; that will give me time to payhim."

    The officers were full of thanks, and took away their prey.  Asthey were going down D'Artagnan laid his hand on the shoulder oftheir leader.

    "May I not drink to your health, and you to mine?" saidD'Artagnan, filling two glasses with the Beaugency wine which hehad obtained from the liberality of M. Bonacieux."That will do me great honor," said the leader of the posse, "andI accept thankfully."

    "Then to yours, monsieur--what is your name?"

    "Boisrenard."

    "Monsieur Boisrenard."

    "To yours, my gentlemen!  What is your name, in your turn, if youplease?"

    "D'Artagnan."

    "To yours, monsieur."

    "And above all others," cried D'Artagnan, as if carried away byhis enthusiasm, "to that of the king and the cardinal."The leader of the posse would perhaps have doubted the sincerityof D'Artagnan if the wine had been bad; but the wine was good,and he was convinced.

    "What diabolical villainy you have performed here," said Porthos,when the officer had rejoined his companions and the four friendsfound themselves alone.  "Shame, shame, for four Musketeers toallow an unfortunate fellow who cried for help to be arrested istheir midst!  And a gentleman to hobnob with a bailiff!""Porthos," said Aramis, "Athos has already told you that you area simpleton, and I am quite of his opinion.  D'Artagnan, you area great man; and when you occupy Monsieur de Treville's place, Iwill come and ask your influence to secure me an abbey.""Well, I am in a maze," said Porthos; "do YOU approve of whatD'Artagnan has done?"

    "PARBLEU!  Indeed I do," said Athos; "I not only approve of whathe has done, but I congratulate him upon it."

    "And now, gentlemen," said D'Artagnan, without stopping toexplain his conduct to Porthos, "All for one, one for all--thatis our motto, is it not?"

    "And yet--" said Porthos.

    "Hold out your hand and swear!" cried Athos and Aramis at once.Overcome by example, grumbling to himself, nevertheless, Porthosstretched out his hand, and the four friends repeated with onevoice the formula dictated by D'Artagnan:

    "All for one, one for all."

    "That's well!  Now let us everyone retire to his own home," saidD'Artagnan, as if he had done nothing but command all his life;"and attention!  For from this moment we are at feud with thecardinal."

    10  A MOUSETRAP IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY

    The invention of the mousetrap does not date from our days; assoon as societies, in forming, had invented any kind of police,that police invented mousetraps.

    As perhaps our readers are not familiar with the slang of the Ruede Jerusalem, and as it is fifteen years since we applied thisword for the first time to this thing, allow us to explain tothem what is a mousetrap.

    When in a house, of whatever kind it may be, an individualsuspected of any crime is arrested, the arrest is held secret.Four or five men are placed in ambuscade in the first room.  Thedoor is opened to all who knock.  It is closed after them, andthey are arrested; so that at the end of two or three days theyhave in their power almost all the HABITUES of the establishment.And that is a mousetrap.

    The apartment of M. Bonacieux, then, became a mousetrap; andwhoever appeared there was taken and interrogated by thecardinal's people.  It must be observed that as a separatepassage led to the first floor, in which D'Artagnan lodged, thosewho called on him were exempted from this detention.Besides, nobody came thither but the three Musketeers; they hadall been engaged in earnest search and inquiries, but haddiscovered nothing.  Athos had even gone so far as to question M.de Treville--a thing which, considering the habitual reticence ofthe worthy Musketeer, had very much astonished his captain.  ButM. de Treville knew nothing, except that the last time he hadseen the cardinal, the king, and the queen, the cardinal lookedvery thoughtful, the king uneasy, and the redness of the queen'seyes donated that she had been sleepless or tearful.  But thislast circumstance was not striking, as the queen since hermarriage had slept badly and wept much.

    M. de Treville requested Athos, whatever might happen, to beobservant of his duty to the king, but particularly to the queen,begging him to convey his desires to his comrades.As to D'Artagnan, he did not budge from his apartment.  Heconverted his chamber into an observatory.  From his windows hesaw all the visitors who were caught.  Then, having removed aplank from his floor, and nothing remaining but a simple ceilingbetween him and the room beneath, in which the interrogatorieswere made, he heard all that passed between the inquisitors andthe accused.

    The interrogatories, preceded by a minute search operated uponthe persons arrested, were almost always framed thus: "Has MadameBonacieux sent anything to you for her husband, or any otherperson?  Has Monsieur Bonacieux sent anything to you for hiswife, or for any other person?  Has either of them confidedanything to you by word of mouth?"

    "If they knew anything, they would not question people in thismanner," said D'Artagnan to himself.  "Now, what is it they wantto know?  Why, they want to know if the Duke of Buckingham is inParis, and if he has had, or is likely to have, an interview withthe queen."

    D'Artagnan held onto this idea, which, from what he had heard,was not wanting in probability.

    In the meantime, the mousetrap continued in operation, andlikewise D'Artagnan's vigilance.

    On the evening of the day after the arrest of poor Bonacieux, asAthos had just left D'Artagnan to report at M. de Treville's, asnine o'clock had just struck, and as Planchet, who had not yetmade the bed, was beginning his task, a knocking was heard at thestreet door.  The door was instantly opened and shut; someone wastaken in the mousetrap.

    D'Artagnan flew to his hole, laid himself down on the floor atfull length, and listened.

    Cries were soon heard, and then moans, which someone appeared tobe endeavoring to stifle.  There were no questions."The devil!" said D'Artagnan to himself.  "It seems like a woman!They search her; she resists; they use force--the scoundrels!"In spite of his prudence, D'Artagnan restrained himself withgreat difficulty from taking a part in the scene that was goingon below.

    "But I tell you that I am the mistress of the house, gentlemen!I tell you I am Madame Bonacieux; I tell you I belong to thequeen!" cried the unfortunate woman.

    "Madame Bonacieux!" murmured D'Artagnan.  "Can I be so lucky asto find what everybody is seeking for?"

    The voice became more and more indistinct; a tumultuous movementshook the partition.  The victim resisted as much as a womancould resist four men.

    "Pardon, gentlemen--par--" murmured the voice, which could nowonly be heard in inarticulate sounds.

    "They are binding her; they are going to drag her away," criedD'Artagnan to himself, springing up from the floor.  "My sword!Good, it is by my side!  Planchet!"

    "Monsieur."

    "Run and seek Athos, Porthos and Aramis.  One of the three willcertainly be at home, perhaps all three.  Tell them to take arms,to come here, and to run!  Ah, I remember, Athos is at Monsieurde Treville's."

    "But where are you going, monsieur, where are you going?""I am going down by the window, in order to be there the sooner,"cried D'Artagnan.  "You put back the boards, sweep the floor, goout at the door, and run as I told you."

    "Oh, monsieur!  Monsieur!  You will kill yourself," criedPlanchet.

    "Hold your tongue, stupid fellow," said D'Artagnan; and layinghold of the casement, he let himself gently down from the firststory, which fortunately was not very elevated, without doinghimself the slightest injury.

    He then went straight to the door and knocked, murmuring, "I willgo myself and be caught in the mousetrap, but woe be to the catsthat shall pounce upon such a mouse!"

    The knocker had scarcely sounded under the hand of the young manbefore the tumult ceased, steps approached, the door was opened,and D'Artagnan, sword in hand, rushed into the rooms of M.Bonacieux, the door of which doubtless acted upon by a spring,closed after him.

    Then those who dwelt in Bonacieux's unfortunate house, togetherwith the nearest neighbors, heard loud cries, stamping of feet,clashing of swords, and breaking of furniture.  A moment after,those who, surprised by this tumult, had gone to their windows tolearn the cause of it, saw the door open, and four men, clothedin black, not COME out of it, but FLY, like so many frightenedcrows, leaving on the ground and on the corners of the furniture,feathers from their wings; that is to say, patches of theirclothes and fragments of their cloaks.

    D'Artagnan was conqueror--without much effort, it must beconfessed, for only one of the officers was armed, and even hedefended himself for form's sake.  It is true that the threeothers had endeavored to knock the young man down with chairs,stools, and crockery; but two or three scratches made by theGascon's blade terrified them.  Ten minutes sufficed for theirdefeat, and D'Artagnan remained master of the field of battle.The neighbors who had opened their windows, with the coolnesspeculiar to the inhabitants of Paris in these times of perpetualriots and disturbances, closed them again as soon as they saw thefour men in black flee--their instinct telling them that for thetime was all over.  Besides, it began to grow late, and then, astoday, people went to bed early in the quarter of the Luxembourg.On being left alone with Mme. Bonacieux, D'Artagnan turned towardher; the poor woman reclined where she had been left,half-fainting upon an armchair.  D'Artagnan examined her with arapid glance.

    She was a charming woman of twenty-five or twenty-six years, withdark hair, blue eyes, and a nose slightly turned up, admirableteeth, and a complexion marbled with rose and opal.  There,however, ended the signs which might have confounded her with alady of rank.  The hands were white, but without delicacy; thefeet did not bespeak the woman of quality.  Happily, D'Artagnanwas not yet acquainted with such niceties.

    While D'Artagnan was examining Mme. Bonacieux, and was, as wehave said, close to her, he saw on the ground a fine cambrichandkerchief, which he picked up, as was his habit, and at thecorner of which he recognized the same cipher he had seen on thehandkerchief which had nearly caused him and Aramis to cut eachother's throat.

    >From that time, D'Artagnan had been cautious with respect tohandkerchiefs with arms on them, and he therefore placed in thepocket of Mme. Bonacieux the one he had just picked up.At that moment Mme. Bonacieux recovered her senses.  She openedher eyes, looked around her with terror, saw that the apartmentwas empty and that she was alone with her liberator.  Sheextended her hands to him with a smile.  Mme. Bonacieux had thesweetest smile in the world.

    "Ah, monsieur!" said she, "you have saved me; permit me to thankyou."

    "Madame," said D'Artagnan, "I have only done what every gentlemanwould have done in my place; you owe me no thanks.""Oh, yes, monsieur, oh, yes; and I hope to prove to you that youhave not served an ingrate.  But what could these men, whom I atfirst took for robbers, want with me, and why is MonsieurBonacieux not here?"

    "Madame, those men were more dangerous than any robbers couldhave been, for they are the agents of the cardinal; and as toyour husband, Monsieur Bonacieux, he is not here because he wasyesterday evening conducted to the Bastille."

    "My husband in the Bastille!" cried Mme. Bonacieux.  "Oh, my God!What has he done?  Poor dear man, he is innocence itself!"And something like a faint smile lighted the still-terrifiedfeatures of the young woman.

    "What has he done, madame?" said D'Artagnan.  "I believe that hisonly crime is to have at the same time the good fortune and themisfortune to be your husband."

    "But, monsieur, you know then--"

    "I know that you have been abducted, madame."

    "And by whom?  Do you know him?  Oh, if you know him, tell me!""By a man of from forty to forty-five years, with black hair, adark complexion, and a scar on his left temple."

    "That is he, that is he; but his name?"

    "Ah, his name?  I do not know that."

    "And did my husband know I had been carried off?""He was informed of it by a letter, written to him by theabductor himself."

    "And does he suspect," said Mme. Bonacieux, with someembarrassment, "the cause of this event?"

    "He attributed it, I believe, to a political cause.""I doubted from the first; and now I think entirely as he does.Then my dear Monsieur Bonacieux has not suspected me a singleinstant?"

    "So far from it, madame, he was too proud of your prudence, andabove all, of your love."

    A second smile, almost imperceptible, stole over the rosy lips ofthe pretty young woman.

    "But," continued D'Artagnan, "how did you escape?""I took advantage of a moment when they left me alone; and as Ihad known since morning the reason of my abduction, with the helpof the sheets I let myself down from the window.  Then, as Ibelieved my husband would be at home, I hastened hither.""To place yourself under his protection?"

    "Oh, no, poor dear man!  I knew very well that he was incapableof defending me; but as he could serve us in other ways, I wishedto inform him."

    "Of what?"

    "Oh, that is not my secret; I must not, therefore, tell you.""Besides," said D'Artagnan, "pardon me, madame, if, guardsman asI am, I remind you of prudence--besides, I believe we are nothere in a very proper place for imparting confidences.  The men Ihave put to flight will return reinforced; if they find us here,we are lost.  I have sent for three of my friends, but who knowswhether they were at home?"

    "Yes, yes!  You are right," cried the affrighted Mme. Bonacieux;"let us fly!  Let us save ourselves."

    At these words she passed her arm under that of D'Artagnan, andurged him forward eagerly.

    "But whither shall we fly--whither escape?"

    "Let us first withdraw from this house; afterward we shall see."The young woman and the young man, without taking the trouble toshut the door after them, descended the Rue des Fossoyeursrapidly, turned into the Rue des Fosses-Monsieur-le-Prince, anddid not stop till they came to the Place St. Sulpice."And now what are we to do, and where do you wish me to conductyou?" asked D'Artagnan.

    "I am at quite a loss how to answer you, I admit," said Mme.Bonacieux.  "My intention was to inform Monsieur Laporte, throughmy husband, in order that Monsieur Laporte might tell usprecisely what he taken place at the Louvre in the last threedays, and whether there is any danger in presenting myselfthere."

    "But I," said D'Artagnan, "can go and inform Monsieur Laporte.""No doubt you could, only there is one misfortune, and that isthat Monsieur Bonacieux is known at the Louvre, and would beallowed to pass; whereas you are not known there, and the gatewould be closed against you."

    "Ah, bah!" said D'Artagnan; "you have at some wicket of theLouvre a CONCIERGE who is devoted to you, and who, thanks to apassword, would--"

    Mme. Bonacieux looked earnestly at the young man."And if I give you this password," said she, "would you forget itas soon as you used it?"

    "By my honor, by the faith of a gentleman!" said D'Artagnan, withan accent so truthful that no one could mistake it."Then I believe you.  You appear to be a brave young man;besides, your fortune may perhaps be the result of yourdevotedness."

    "I will do, without a promise and voluntarily, all that I can doto serve the king and be agreeable to the queen.  Dispose of me,then, as a friend."

    "But I--where shall I go meanwhile?"

    "Is there nobody from whose house Monsieur Laporte can come andfetch you?"

    "No, I can trust nobody."

    "Stop," said D'Artagnan; "we are near Athos's door.  Yes, here itis."

    "Who is this Athos?"

    "One of my friends."

    "But if he should be at home and see me?"

    "He is not at home, and I will carry away the key, after havingplaced you in his apartment."

    "But if he should return?"

    "Oh, he won't return; and if he should, he will be told that Ihave brought a woman with me, and that woman is in hisapartment."

    "But that will compromise me sadly, you know."

    "Of what consequence?  Nobody knows you.  Besides, we are in asituation to overlook ceremony."

    "Come, then, let us go to your friend's house.  Where does helive?"

    "Rue Ferou, two steps from here."

    "Let us go!"

    Both resumed their way.  As D'Artagnan had foreseen, Athos wasnot within.  He took the key, which was customarily given him asone of the family, ascended the stairs, and introduced Mme.Bonacieux into the little apartment of which we have given adescription.

    "You are at home," said he.  "Remain here, fasten the doorinside, and open it to nobody unless you hear three taps likethis;" and he tapped thrice--two taps close together and prettyhard, the other after an interval, and lighter.

    "That is well," said Mme. Bonacieux.  "Now, in my turn, let megive you my instructions."

    "I am all attention."

    "Present yourself at the wicket of the Louvre, on the side of theRue de l'Echelle, and ask for Germain."

    "Well, and then?"

    "He will ask you what you want, and you will answer by these twowords, 'Tours' and 'Bruxelles.'  He will at once put himself atyour orders."

    "And what shall I command him?"

    "To go and fetch Monsieur Laporte, the queen's VALET DE CHAMBRE.""And when he shall have informed him, and Monsieur Laporte iscome?"

    "You will send him to me."

    "That is well; but where and how shall I see you again?""Do you wish to see me again?"

    "Certainly."

    "Well, let that care be mine, and be at ease."

    "I depend upon your word."

    "You may."

    D'Artagnan bowed to Mme. Bonacieux, darting at her the mostloving glance that he could possibly concentrate upon hercharming little person; and while he descended the stairs, heheard the door closed and double-locked.  In two bounds he was atthe Louvre; as he entered the wicket of L'Echelle, ten o'clockstruck.  All the events we have described had taken place withina half hour.

    Everything fell out as Mme. Bonacieux prophesied.  On hearing thepassword, Germain bowed.  In a few minutes, Laporte was at thelodge; in two words D'Artagnan informed him where Mme. Bonacieuxwas.  Laporte assured himself, by having it twice repeated, ofthe accurate address, and set off at a run.  Hardly, however, hadhe taken ten steps before he returned.

    "Young man," said he to D'Artagnan, "a suggestion.""What?"

    "You may get into trouble by what has taken place.""You believe so?"

    "Yes.  Have you any friend whose clock is too slow?""Well?"

    "Go and call upon him, in order that he may give evidence if yourhaving been with him at half past nine.  In a court of justicethat is called an alibi."

    D'Artagnan found his advice prudent.  He took to his heels, andwas soon at M. de Treville's; but instead of going into thesaloon with the rest of the crowd, he asked to be introduced toM. de Treville's office.  As D'Artagnan so constantly frequentedthe hotel, no difficulty was made in complying with his request,and a servant went to inform M. de Treville that his youngcompatriot, having something important to communicate, solicited aprivate audience.  Five minutes after, M. de Treville was askingD'Artagnan what he could do to serve him, and what caused hisvisit at so late an hour.

    "Pardon me, monsieur," said D'Artagnan, who had profited by themoment he had been left alone to put back M. de Treville's clockthree-quarters of an hour, "but I thought, as it was yet onlytwenty-five minutes past nine, it was not too late to wait uponyou."

    "Twenty-five minutes past nine!" cried M. de Treville, looking atthe clock; "why, that's impossible!"

    "Look, rather, monsieur," said D'Artagnan, "the clock shows it.""That's true," said M. de Treville; "I believed it later.  Butwhat can I do for you?"

    Then D'Artagnan told M. de Treville a long history about thequeen.  He expressed to him the fears he entertained with respectto her Majesty; he related to him what he had heard of theprojects of the cardinal with regard to Buckingham, and all witha tranquillity and candor of which M. de Treville was the morethe dupe, from having himself, as we have said, observedsomething fresh between the cardinal, the king, and the queen.As ten o'clock was striking, D'Artagnan left M. de Treville, whothanked him for his information, recommended him to have theservice of the king and queen always at heart, and returned tothe saloon; but at the foot of the stairs, D'Artagnan rememberedhe had forgotten his cane.  He consequently sprang up again,re-entered the office, with a turn of his finger set the clockright again, that it might not be perceived the next day that ithad been put wrong, and certain from that time that he had awitness to prove his alibi, he ran downstairs and soon foundhimself in the street.

    11  IN WHICH THE PLOT THICKENS

    His visit to M. de Treville being paid, the pensive D'Artagnantook the longest way homeward.

    On what was D'Artagnan thinking, that he strayed thus from hispath, gazing at the stars of heaven, and sometimes sighing,sometimes smiling?

    He was thinking of Mme. Bonacieux.  For an apprentice Musketeerthe young woman was almost an ideal of love.  Pretty, mysterious,initiated in almost all the secrets of the court, which reflectedsuch a charming gravity over her pleasing features, it might besurmised that she was not wholly unmoved; and this is anirresistible charm to novices in love.  Moreover, D'Artagnan haddelivered her from the hands of the demons who wished to searchand ill treat her; and this important service had establishedbetween them one of those sentiments of gratitude which so easilyassume a more tender character.

    D'Artagnan already fancied himself, so rapid is the flight of ourdreams upon the wings of imagination, accosted by a messengerfrom the young woman, who brought him some billet appointing ameeting, a gold chain, or a diamond.  We have observed that youngcavaliers received presents from their king without shame.  Letus add that in these times of lax morality they had no moredelicacy with respect to the mistresses; and that the latteralmost always left them valuable and durable remembrances, as ifthey essayed to conquer the fragility of their sentiments by thesolidity of their gifts.

    Without a blush, men made their way in the world by the means ofwomen blushing.  Such as were only beautiful gave their beauty,whence, without doubt, comes the proverb, "The most beautifulgirl in the world can only give what she has."  Such as were richgave in addition a part of their money; and a vast number ofheroes of that gallant period may be cited who would neither havewon their spurs in the first place, nor their battles afterward,without the purse, more or less furnished, which their mistressfastened to the saddle bow.

    D'Artagnan owned nothing.  Provincial diffidence, that slightvarnish, the ephemeral flower, that down of the peach, hadevaporated to the winds through the little orthodox counselswhich the three Musketeers gave their friend.  D'Artagnan,following the strange custom of the times, considered himself atParis as on a campaign, neither more nor less than if he had beenin Flanders--Spain yonder, woman here,  In each there was anenemy to contend with, and contributions to be levied.But, we must say, at the present moment D'Artagnan was ruled byas feeling much more noble and disinterested.  The mercer hadsaid that he was rich;  the young man might easily guess thatwith so weak a man as M. Bonacieux; and interest was almostforeign to this commencement of love, which had been theconsequence of it.  We say ALMOST, for the idea that a young,handsome, kind, and witty woman is at the same time rich takesnothing from the beginning of love, but on the contrarystrengthens it.

    There are in affluence a crowd of aristocratic cares and capriceswhich are highly becoming to beauty.  A fine and white stocking,a silken robe, a lace kerchief, a pretty slipper on the foot, atasty ribbon on the head do not make an ugly woman pretty, butthey make a pretty woman beautiful, without reckoning the hands,which gain by all this; the hands, among women particularly, tobe beautiful must be idle.

    Then D'Artagnan, as the reader, from whom we have not concealedthe state of his fortune, very well knows--D'Artagnan was not amillionaire; he hoped to become one someday, but the time whichin his own mind he fixed upon for this happy change was still fardistant.  In the meanwhile, how disheartening to see the womanone loves long for those thousands of nothings which constitute awoman's happiness, and be unable to give her those thousands ofnothings.  At least, when the woman is rich and the lover is notthat which he cannot offer she offers to herself; and although itis generally with her husband's money that she procures herselfthis indulgence, the gratitude for it seldom reverts to him.Then D'Artagnan, disposed to become the most tender of lovers,was at the same time a very devoted friend,  In the midst of hisamorous projects for the mercer's wife, he did not forget hisfriends.  The pretty  Mme. Bonacieux was just the woman to walkwith in the Plain St. Denis or in the fair of St. Germain, incompany with Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, to whom D'Artagnan hadoften remarked this.  Then one could enjoy charming littledinners, where one touches on one side the hand of a friend, andon the other the foot of a mistress.  Besides, on pressingoccasions, in extreme difficulties, D'Artagnan would become thepreserver of his friends.

    And M. Bonacieux? whom D'Artagnan had pushed into the hands ofthe officers, denying him aloud although he had promised in awhisper to save him.  We are compelled to admit to our readersthat D'Artagnan thought nothing about him in any way; or that ifhe did think of him, it was only to say to himself that he wasvery well where he was, wherever it might be.  Love is the mostselfish of all the passions.

    Let our readers reassure themselves.  IF D'Artagnan forgets hishost, or appears to forget him, under the pretense of not knowingwhere he has been carried, we will not forget him, and we knowwhere he is.  But for the moment, let us do as did the amorousGascon; we will see after the worthy mercer later.D'Artagnan, reflecting on his future amours, addressing himselfto the beautiful night, and smiling at the stars, rescinded theRue Cherish-Midi, or Chase-Midi, as it was then called.  As hefound himself in the quarter in which Aramis lived, he took itinto his head to pay his friend a visit in order to explain themotives which had led him to send Planchet with a request that hewould come instantly to the mousetrap.  Now, if Aramis had beenat home when Planchet came to his abode, he had doubtlesshastened to the Rue des Fossoyeurs, and finding nobody there buthis other two companions perhaps, they would not be able toconceive what all this meant.  This mystery required anexplanation; at least, so D'Artagnan declared to himself.He likewise thought this was an opportunity for talking aboutpretty little Mme. Bonacieux, of whom his head, if not his heart,was already full.  We must never look for discretion in firstlove.  First love is accompanied by such excessive joy thatunless the joy be allowed to overflow, it will stifle you.Paris for two hours past had been dark, and seemed a desert.Eleven o'clock sounded from all the clocks of the Faubourg St.Germain.  It was delightful weather.  D'Artagnan was passingalong a lane on the spot where the Rue d'Assas is now situated,breathing the balmy emanations which were borne upon the windfrom the Rue de Vaugirard, and which arose from the gardensrefreshed by the dews of evening and the breeze of night.  From adistance resounded, deadened, however, by good shutters, thesongs of the tipplers, enjoying themselves in the cabaretsscattered along the plain.  Arrived at the end of the lane,D'Artagnan turned to the left.  The house in which Aramis dweltwas situated between the Rue Cassette and the Rue Servandoni.D'Artagnan had just passed the Rue Cassette, and alreadyperceived the door of his friend's house, shaded by a mass ofsycamores and clematis which formed a vast arch opposite thefront of it, when he perceived something like a shadow issuingfrom the Rue Servandoni.  This something was enveloped in acloak, and D'Artagnan at first believed it was a man; but by thesmallness of the form, the hesitation of the walk, and theindecision of the step, he soon discovered that it was a woman.Further, this woman, as if not certain of the house she wasseeking, lifted up her eyes to look around her, stopped, wentbackward, and then returned again.  D'Artagnan was perplexed."Shall I go and offer her my services?" thought he.  "By her stepshe must be young; perhaps she is pretty.  Oh, yes!  But a womanwho wanders in the streets at this hour only ventures out to meether lover.  If I should disturb a rendezvous, that would not bethe best means of commencing an acquaintance."

    Meantime the young woman continued to advance, counting thehouses and windows.  This was neither long nor difficult.  Therewere but three hotels in this part of the street; and only twowindows looking toward the road, one of which was in a pavilionparallel to that which Aramis occupied, the other belonging toAramis himself.

    "PARIDIEU!" said D'Artagnan to himself, to whose mind the nieceof the theologian reverted, "PARDIEU, it would be droll if thisbelated dove should be in search of our friend's house.  But onmy soul, it looks so.  Ah, my dear Aramis, this time I shall findyou out."  And D'Artagnan, making himself as small as he could,concealed himself in the darkest side of the street near a stonebench placed at the back of a niche.

    The young woman continued to advance; and in addition to thelightness of her step, which had betrayed her, she emitted alittle cough which denoted a sweet voice.  D'Artagnan believedthis cough to be a signal.

    Nevertheless, whether the cough had been answered by a similarsignal which had fixed the irresolution of the nocturnal seeker,or whether without this aid she saw that she had arrived at theend of her journey, she resolutely drew near to Aramis's shutter,and tapped, at three equal intervals, with her bent finger."This is all very fine, dear Aramis," murmured D'Artagnan."Ah, Monsieur Hypocrite, I understand how you study theology."The three blows were scarcely struck, when the inside blind wasopened and a light appeared through the panes of the outsideshutter.

    "Ah, ah!" said the listener, "not through doors, but throughwindows!  Ah, this visit was expected.  We shall see the windowsopen, and the lady enter by escalade.  Very pretty!"But to the great astonishment of D'Artagnan, the shutter remainedclosed.  Still more, the light which had shone for an instantdisappeared, and all was again in obscurity.

    D'Artagnan thought this could not last long, and continued tolook with all his eyes and listen with all his ears.He was right; at the end of some seconds two sharp taps wereheard inside.  The young woman in the street replied by a singletap, and the shutter was opened a little way.

    It may be judged whether D'Artagnan looked or listened withavidity.  Unfortunately the light had been removed into anotherchamber; but the eyes of the young man were accustomed to thenight.  Besides, the eyes of the Gascons have, as it is asserted,like those of cats, the faculty of seeing in the dark.D'Artagnan then saw that the young woman took from her pocket awhite object, which she unfolded quickly, and which took the formof a handkerchief.  She made her interlocutor observe the cornerof this unfolded object.

    This immediately recalled to D'Artagnan's mind the handkerchiefwhich he had found at the feet of Mme. Bonacieux, which hadreminded him of that which he had dragged from under the feet ofAramis.

    "What the devil could that handkerchief signify?"Placed where he was, D'Artagnan could not perceive the face ofAramis.  We say Aramis, because the young man entertained nodoubt that it was his friend who held this dialogue from theinterior with the lady of the exterior.  Curiosity prevailed overprudence; and profiting by the preoccupation into which the sightof the handkerchief appeared to have plunged the two personagesnow on the scene, he stole from his hiding place, and quick aslightning, but stepping with utmost caution, he ran and placedhimself close to the angle of the wall, from which his eye couldpierce the interior of Aramis's room.

    Upon gaining this advantage D'Artagnan was near uttering a cry ofsurprise; it was not Aramis who was conversing with the nocturnalvisitor, it was a woman!  D'Artagnan, however, could only seeenough to recognize the form of her vestments, not enough todistinguish her features.

    At the same instant the woman inside drew a second handkerchieffrom her pocket, and exchanged it for that which had just beenshown to her.  Then some words were spoken by the two women.  Atlength the shutter closed.  The woman who was outside the windowturned round, and passed within four steps of D'Artagnan, pullingdown the hood of her mantle; but the precaution was too late,D'Artagnan had already recognized Mme. Bonacieux.Mme. Bonacieux!  The suspicion that it was she had crossed themind of D'Artagnan when she drew the handkerchief from herpocket; but what probability was there that Mme. Bonacieux, whohad sent for M. Laporte in order to be reconducted to the Louvre,should be running about the streets of Paris at half past elevenat night, at the risk of being abducted a second time?This must be, then, an affair of importance; and what is the mostimportant affair to a woman of twenty-five!  Love.But was it on her own account, or on account of another, that sheexposed herself to such hazards?  This was a question the youngman asked himself, whom the demon of jealousy already gnawed,being in heart neither more nor less than an accepted lover.There was a very simple means of satisfying himself whither Mme.Bonacieux was going; that was to follow her.  This method was sosimple that D'Artagnan employed it quite naturally andinstinctively.

    But at the sight of the young man, who detached himself from thewall like a statue walking from its niche, and at the noise ofthe steps which she heard resound behind her, Mme. Bonacieuxuttered a little cry and fled.

    D'Artagnan ran after her.  It was not difficult for him toovertake a woman embarrassed with her cloak.  He came up with herbefore she had traversed a third of the street.  The unfortunatewoman was exhausted, not by fatigue, but by terror, and whenD'Artagnan placed his hand upon her shoulder, she sank upon oneknee, crying in a choking voice, "Kill me, if you please, youshall know nothing!"

    D'Artagnan raised her by passing his arm round her waist; but ashe felt by her weight she was on the point of fainting, he madehaste to reassure her by protestations of devotedness.  Theseprotestations were nothing for Mme. Bonacieux, for suchprotestations may be made with the worst intentions in the world;but the voice was all Mme. Bonacieux thought she recognized thesound of that voice; she reopened her eyes, cast a quick glanceupon the man who had terrified her so, and at once perceiving itwas D'Artagnan, she uttered a cry of joy, "Oh, it is you, it isyou!  Thank God, thank God!"

    "Yes, it is I," said D'Artagnan, "it is I, whom God has sent towatch over you."

    "Was it with that intention you followed me?" asked the youngwoman, with a coquettish smile, whose somewhat banteringcharacter resumed its influence, and with whom all fear haddisappeared from the moment in which she recognized a friend inone she had taken for an enemy.

    "No," said D'Artagnan; "no, I confess it.  It was chance thatthrew me in your way; I saw a woman knocking at the window of oneof my friends."

    "One of your friends?" interrupted Mme. Bonacieux."Without doubt; Aramis is one of my best friends.""Aramis!  Who is he?"

    "Come, come, you won't tell me you don't know Aramis?""This is the first time I ever heard his name pronounced.""It is the first time I ever heard his name pronounced.""It is the first time, then, that you ever went to that house?""Undoubtedly."

    "And you did not know that it was inhabited by a young man?""No."

    "By a Musketeer?"

    "No, indeed!"

    "It was not he, then, you came to seek?"

    "Not the least in the world.  Besides, you must have seen thatthe person to whom I spoke was a woman."

    "That is true; but this woman is a friend of Aramis--""I know nothing of that."

    "--since she lodges with him."

    "That does not concern me."

    "But who is she?"

    "Oh, that is not my secret."

    "My dear Madame Bonacieux, you are charming; but at the same timeyou are one of the most mysterious women."

    "Do I lose by that?"

    "No; you are, on the contrary, adorable."

    "Give me your arm, then."

    "Most willingly.  And now?"

    "Now escort me."

    "Where?"

    "Where I am going."

    "But where are you going?"

    "You will see, because you will leave me at the door.""Shall I wait for you?"

    "That will be useless."

    "You will return alone, then?"

    "Perhaps yes, perhaps no."

    "But will the person who shall accompany you afterward be a manor a woman?"

    "I don't know yet."

    "But I will know it!"

    "How so?"

    "I will wait until you come out."

    "In that case, adieu."

    "Why so?"

    "I do not want you."

    "But you have claimed--"

    "The aid of a gentleman, not the watchfulness of a spy.""The word is rather hard."

    "How are they called who follow others in spite of them?""They are indiscreet."

    "The word is too mild."

    "well, madame, I perceive I must do as you wish.""Why did you deprive yourself of the merit of doing so at once?""Is there no merit in repentance?"

    "And do you really repent?"

    "I know nothing about it myself.  But what I know is that Ipromise to do all you wish if you allow me to accompany you whereyou are going."

    "And you will leave me then?"

    "Yes."

    "Without waiting for my coming out again?"

    "Yes."

    "Word of honor?"

    "By the faith of a gentleman.  Take my arm, and let us go."D'Artagnan offered his arm to Mme. Bonacieux, who willingly tookit, half laughing, half trembling, and both gained the top of Ruede la Harpe.  Arriving there, the young woman seemed to hesitate,as she had before done in the Rue Vaugirard.  She seemed,however, by certain signs, to recognize a door, and approachingthat door, "And now, monsieur," said she, "it is here I havebusiness; a thousand thanks for your honorable company, which hassaved me from all the dangers to which, alone I was exposed.  Butthe moment is come to keep your word; I have reached mydestination."

    "And you will have nothing to fear on your return?""I shall have nothing to fear but robbers."

    "And that is nothing?"

    "What could they take from me?  I have not a penny about me.""You forget that beautiful handkerchief with the coat of arms.""Which?"

    "That which I found at your feet, and replaced in your pocket.""Hold your tongue, imprudent man!  Do you wish to destroy me?""You see very plainly that there is still danger for you, since asingle word makes you tremble; and you confess that if that wordwere heard you would be ruined.  Come, come, madame!" criedD'Artagnan, seizing her hands, and surveying her with an ardentglance, "come, be more generous.  Confide in me.  Have you notread in my eyes that there is nothing but devotion and sympathyin my heart?"

    "Yes," replied Mme. Bonacieux; "therefore, ask my own secrets,and I will reveal them to you; but those of others--that is quiteanother thing."

    "Very well," said D'Artagnan, "I shall discover them; as thesesecrets may have an influence over your life, these secrets mustbecome mine."

    "Beware of what you do!" cried the young woman, in a manner soserious as to make D'Artagnan start in spite of himself.  "Oh,meddle in nothing which concerns me.  Do not seek to assist me inthat which I am accomplishing.  This I ask of you in the name ofthe interest with which I inspire you, in the name of the serviceyou have rendered me and which I never shall forget while I havelife.  Rather, place faith in what I tell you.  Have no moreconcern about me; I exist no longer for you, any more than if youhad never seen me."

    "Must Aramis do as much as I, madame?" said D'Artagnan, deeplypiqued.

    "This is the second or third time, monsieur, that you haverepeated that name, and yet I have told you that I do not knowhim."

    "You do not know the man at whose shutter you have just knocked?Indeed, madame, you believe me too credulous!"

    "Confess that it is for the sake of making me talk that youinvent this story and create this personage."

    "I invent nothing, madame; I create nothing.  I only speak thatexact truth."

    "And you say that one of your friends lives in that house?""I say so, and I repeat it for the third time; that house is oneinhabited by my friend, and that friend is Aramis.""All this will be cleared up at a later period," murmured theyoung woman; "no, monsieur, be silent."

    "If you could see my heart," said D'Artagnan, "you would thereread so much curiosity that you would pity me and so much lovethat you would instantly satisfy my curiosity.  We have nothingto fear from those who love us."

    "You speak very suddenly of love, monsieur," said the youngwoman, shaking her head.

    "That is because love has come suddenly upon me, and for thefirst time; and because I am only twenty."

    The young woman looked at him furtively.

    "Listen; I am already upon the scent," resumed D'Artagnan."About three months ago I was near having a duel with Aramisconcerning a handkerchief resembling the one you showed to thewoman in his house--for a handkerchief marked in the same manner,I am sure."

    "Monsieur," said the young woman, "you weary me very much, Iassure you, with your questions."

    "But you, madame, prudent as you are, think, if you were to bearrested with that handkerchief, and that handkerchief were to beseized, would you not be compromised?"

    "In what way?  The initials are only mine--C. B., ConstanceBonacieux."

    "Or Camille de Bois-Tracy."

    "Silence, monsieur!  Once again, silence!  Ah, since the dangersI incur on my own account cannot stop you, think of those you mayyourself run!"

    "Me?"

    "Yes; there is peril of imprisonment, risk of life in knowingme."

    "Then I will not leave you."

    "Monsieur!" said the young woman, supplicating him and claspingher hands together, "monsieur, in the name of heaven, by thehonor of a soldier, by the courtesy of a gentleman, depart!There, there midnight sounds!  That is the hour when I amexpected."

    "Madame," said the young man, bowing; "I can refuse nothing askedof me thus.  Be content; I will depart."

    "But you will not follow me; you will not watch me?""I will return home instantly."

    "Ah, I was quite sure you were a good and brave young man," saidMme. Bonacieux, holding out her hand to him, and placing theother upon the knocker of a little door almost hidden in thewall.

    D'Artagnan seized the hand held out to him, and kissed itardently.

    "Ah!  I wish I had never seen you!" cried D'Artagnan, with thatingenuous roughness which women often prefer to the affectationsof politeness, because it betrays the depths of the thought andproves that feeling prevails over reason.

    "Well!" resumed Mme. Bonacieux, in a voice almost caressing, andpressing the hand of D'Artagnan, who had not relinquished hers,"well:  I will not say as much as you do; what is lost for todaymay not be lost forever.  Who knows, when I shall be at liberty,that I may not satisfy your curiosity?"

    "And will you make the same promise to my love?" criedD'Artagnan, beside himself with joy.

    "Oh, as to that, I do not engage myself.  That depends upon thesentiments with which you may inspire me."

    "Then today, madame--"

    "Oh, today, I am no further than gratitude."

    "Ah!  You are too charming," said D'Artagnan, sorrowfully; "andyou abuse my love."

    "No, I use your generosity, that's all.  But be of good cheer;with certain people, everything comes round."

    "Oh, you render me the happiest of men!  Do not forget thisevening--do not forget that promise."

    "Be satisfied.  In the proper time and place I will remembereverything.  Now then, go, go, in the name of heaven!  I wasexpected at sharp midnight, and I am late."

    "By five minutes."

    "Yes; but in certain circumstances five minutes are five ages.""When one loves."

    "Well!  And who told you I had no affair with a lover?""It is a man, then, who expects you?" cried D'Artagnan.  "A man!""The discussion is going to begin again!" said Mme. Bonacieux,with a half-smile which was not exempt from a tinge ofimpatience.

    "No, no; I go, I depart!  I believe in you, and I would have allthe merit of my devotion, even if that devotion were stupidity.Adieu, madame, adieu!"

    And as if he only felt strength to detach himself by a violenteffort from the hand he held, he sprang away, running, while Mme.Bonacieux knocked, as at the shutter, three light and regulartaps.  When he had gained the angle of the street, he turned.The door had been opened, and shut again; the mercer's prettywife had disappeared.

    D'Artagnan pursued his way.  He had given his word not to watchMme. Bonacieux, and if his life had depended upon the spot towhich she was going or upon the person who should accompany her,D'Artagnan would have returned home, since he had so promised.Five minutes later he was in the Rue des Fossoyeurs."Poor Athos!" said he; "he will never guess what all this means.He will have fallen asleep waiting for me, or else he will havereturned home, where he will have learned that a woman had beenthere.  A woman with Athos!  After all," continued D'Artagnan,"there was certainly one with Aramis.  All this is very strange;and I am curious to know how it will end."

    "Badly, monsieur, badly!" replied a voice which the young manrecognized as that of Planchet; for, soliloquizing aloud, as verypreoccupied people do, he had entered the alley, at the end ofwhich were the stairs which led to his chamber.

    "How badly?  What do you mean by that, you idiot?" askedD'Artagnan.  "What has happened?"

    "All sorts of misfortunes."

    "What?"

    "In the first place, Monsieur Athos is arrested.""Arrested!  Athos arrested!  What for?"

    "He was found in your lodging; they took him for you.""And by whom was he arrested?"

    "By Guards brought by the men in black whom you put to flight.""Why did he not tell them his name?  Why did he not tell them heknew nothing about this affair?"

    "He took care not to do so, monsieur; on the contrary, he came upto me and said, 'It is your master that needs his liberty at thismoment and not I, since he knows everything and I know nothing.They will believe he is arrested, and that will give him time; inthree days I will tell them who I am, and they cannot fail to letme go.'"

    "Bravo, Athos!  Noble heart!" murmured D'Artagnan.  "I know himwell there!  And what did the officers do?"

    "Four conveyed him away, I don't know where--to the Bastille orFort l'Eveque.  Two remained with the men in black, who rummagedevery place and took all the papers.  The last two mounted guardat the door during this examination; then, when all was over,they went away, leaving the house empty and exposed.""And Porthos and Aramis?"

    "I could not find them; they did not come."

    "But they may come any moment, for you left word that I awaitedthem?"

    "Yes, monsieur."

    "Well, don't budge, then; if they come, tell them what hashappened.  Let them wait for me at the Pomme-de-Pin.  Here itwould be dangerous; the house may be watched.  I will run toMonsieur de Treville to tell them all this, and will meet themthere."

    "Very well, monsieur," said Planchet.

    "But you will remain; you are not afraid?" said D'Artagnan,coming back to recommend courage to his lackey.

    "Be easy, monsieur," said Planchet; "you do not know me yet.  Iam brave when I set about it.  It is all in beginning.  Besides,I am a Picard."

    "Then it is understood," said D'Artagnan; "you would rather bekilled than desert your post?"

    "Yes, monsieur; and there is nothing I would not do to prove toMonsieur that I am attached to him."

    "Good!" said D'Artagnan to himself.  "It appears that the methodI have adopted with this boy is decidedly the best.  I shall useit again upon occasion."

    And with all the swiftness of his legs, already a little fatiguedhowever, with the perambulations of the day, D'Artagnan directedhis course toward M. de Treville's.

    M. de Treville was not at his hotel.  His company was on guard atthe Louvre; he was at the Louvre with his company.It was necessary to reach M. de Treville; it was important thathe should be informed of what was passing.  D'Artagnan resolvedto try and enter the Louvre.  His costume of Guardsman in thecompany of M. Dessessart ought to be his passport.He therefore went down the Rue des Petits Augustins, and came upto the quay, in order to take the New Bridge.  He had at first anidea of crossing by the ferry; but on gaining the riverside, hehad mechanically put his hand into his pocket, and perceived thathe had not wherewithal to pay his passage.

    As he gained the top of the Rue Guenegaud, he saw two personscoming out of the Rue Dauphine whose appearance very much struckhim.  Of the two persons who composed this group, one was a manand the other a woman.  The woman had the outline of Mme.Bonacieux; the man resembled Aramis so much as to be mistaken forhim.

    Besides, the woman wore that black mantle which D'Artagnan couldstill see outlined on the shutter of the Rue de Vaugirard and onthe door of the Rue de la Harpe; still further, the man wore theuniform of a Musketeer.

    The woman's hood was pulled down, and the man geld a handkerchiefto his face.  Both, as this double precaution indicated, had aninterest in not being recognized.

    They took the bridge.  That was D'Artagnan's road, as he wasgoing to the Louvre.  D'Artagnan followed them.

    He had not gone twenty steps before he became convinced that thewoman was really Mme. Bonacieux and that the man was Aramis.He felt at that instant all the suspicions of jealousy agitatinghis heart.  He felt himself doubly betrayed, by his friend and byher whom he already loved like a mistress.  Mme. Bonacieux haddeclared to him, by all the gods, that she did not know Aramis;and a quarter of an hour after having made this assertion, hefound her hanging on the arm of Aramis.

    D'Artagnan did not reflect that he had only known the mercer'spretty wife for three hours; that she owed him nothing but alittle gratitude for having delivered her from the men in black,who wished to carry her off, and that she had promised himnothing.  He considered himself an outraged, betrayed, andridiculed lover.  Blood and anger mounted to his face; he wasresolved to unravel the mystery.

    The young man and young woman perceived they were watched, andredoubled their speed.  D'Artagnan determined upon his course.He passed them, then returned so as to meet them exactly beforethe Samaritaine. Which was illuminated by a lamp which threw itslight over all that part of the bridge.

    D'Artagnan stopped before them, and they stopped before him."What do you want, monsieur?" demanded the Musketeer, recoiling astep, and with a foreign accent, which proved to D'Artagnan thathe was deceived in one of his conjectures.

    "It is not Aramis!" cried he.

    "No, monsieur, it is not Aramis; and by your exclamation Iperceive you have mistaken me for another, and pardon you.""You pardon me?" cried D'Artagnan.

    "Yes," replied the stranger.  "Allow me, then, to pass on, sinceit is not with me you have anything to do."

    "You are right, monsieur, it is not with you that I have anythingto do; it is with Madame."

    "With Madame!  You do not know her," replied the stranger."You are deceived, monsieur; I know her very well.""Ah," said Mme. Bonacieux; in a tone of reproach, "ah, monsieur,I had your promise as a soldier and your word as a gentleman.  Ihoped to be able to rely upon that."

    "And I, madame!" said D'Artagnan, embarrassed; "you promised me--""Take my arm, madame," said the stranger, "and let us continueour way."

    D'Artagnan, however, stupefied, cast down, annihilated by allthat happened, stood, with crossed arms, before the Musketeer andMme. Bonacieux.

    The Musketeer advanced two steps, and pushed D'Artagnan asidewith his hand.  D'Artagnan made a spring backward and drew hissword.  At the same time, and with the rapidity of lightning, thestranger drew his.

    "In the name of heaven, my Lord!" cried Mme. Bonacieux, throwingherself between the combatants and seizing the swords with herhands.

    "My Lord!" cried D'Artagnan, enlightened by a sudden idea, "myLord!  Pardon me, monsieur, but you are not--"

    "My Lord the Duke of Buckingham," said Mme. Bonacieux, in anundertone; "and now you may ruin us all."

    "My Lord, Madame, I ask a hundred pardons!  But I love her, myLord, and was jealous.  You know what it is to love, my Lord.Pardon me, and then tell me how I can risk my life to serve yourGrace?"

    "You are a brave young man," said Buckingham, holding out hishand to D'Artagnan, who pressed it respectfully.  "You offer meyour services; with the same frankness I accept them.  Follow usat a distance of twenty paces, as far as the Louvre, and ifanyone watches us, slay him!"

    D'Artagnan placed his naked sword under his arm, allowed the dukeand Mme. Bonacieux to take twenty steps ahead, and then followedthem, ready to execute the instructions of the noble and elegantminister of Charles I.

    Fortunately, he had no opportunity to give the duke this proof ofhis devotion, and the young woman and the handsome Musketeerentered the Louvre by the wicket of the Echelle without anyinterference.

    As for D'Artagnan, he immediately repaired to the cabaret of thePomme-de-Pin, where he found Porthos and Aramis awaiting him.Without giving them any explanation of the alarm andinconvenience he had caused them, he told them that he hadterminated the affair alone in which he had for a moment believedhe should need their assistance.

    Meanwhile, carried away as we are by our narrative, we must leaveour three friends to themselves, and follow the Duke ofBuckingham and his guide through the labyrinths of the Louvre.

    12  GEORGE VILLIERS, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM

    Mme. Bonacieux and the duke entered the Louvre withoutdifficulty.  Mme. Bonacieux was known to belong to the queen; theduke wore the uniform of the Musketeers of M. de Treville, who,as we have said, were that evening on guard.  Besides, Germainwas in the interests of the queen; and if anything should happen,Mme. Bonacieux would be accused of having introduced her loverinto the Louvre, that was all.  She took the risk upon herself.Her reputation would be lost, it is true; but of what value inthe world was the reputation of the little wife of a mercer?Once within the interior of the court, the duke and the youngwoman followed the wall for the space of about twenty-five steps.This space passed, Mme. Bonacieux pushed a little servants' door,open by day but generally closed at night.  The door yielded.Both entered, and found themselves in darkness; but Mme.Bonacieux was acquainted with all the turnings and windings ofthis part of the Louvre, appropriated for the people of thehousehold.  She closed the door after her, took the duke by thehand, and after a few experimental steps, grasped a balustrade,put her foot upon the bottom step, and began to ascend thestaircase.  The duke counted two stories.  She then turned to theright, followed the course of a long corridor, descended aflight, went a few steps farther, introduced a key into a lock,opened a door, and pushed the duke into an apartment lighted onlyby a lamp, saying, "Remain here, my Lord Duke; someone willcome."  She then went out by the same door, which she locked, sothat the duke found himself literally a prisoner.Nevertheless, isolated as he was, we must say that the Duke ofBuckingham did not experience an instant of fear.  One of thesalient points of his character was the search for adventures anda love of romance.  Brave, rash, and enterprising, this was notthe first time he had risked his life in such attempts.  He hadlearned that the pretended message from Anne of Austria, upon thefaith of which he had come to Paris, was a snare; but instead ofregaining England, he had, abusing the position in which he hadbeen placed, declared to the queen that he would not departwithout seeing her.  The queen had at first positively refused;but at length became afraid that the duke, if exasperated, wouldcommit some folly.  She had already decided upon seeing him andurging his immediate departure, when, on the very evening ofcoming to this decision, Mme. Bonacieux, who was charged withgoing to fetch the duke and conducting him to the Louvre, wasabducted.  For two days no one knew what had become of her, andeverything remained in suspense; but once free, and placed incommunication with Laporte, matters resumed their course, and sheaccomplished the perilous enterprise which, but for her arrest,would have been executed three days earlier.

    Buckingham, left alone, walked toward a mirror.  His Musketeer'suniform became him marvelously.

    At thirty-five, which was then his age, he passed, with justtitle, for the handsomest gentleman and the most elegant cavalierof France or England.

    The favorite of two kings, immensely rich, all-powerful in akingdom which he disordered at his fancy and calmed again at hiscaprice, George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, had lived one ofthose fabulous existences which survive, in the course ofcenturies, to astonish posterity.

    Sure of himself, convinced of his own power, certain that thelaws which rule other men could not reach him, he went straightto the object he aimed at, even were this object were so elevatedand so dazzling that it would have been madness for any othereven to have contemplated it.  It was thus he had succeeded inapproaching several times the beautiful and proud Anne ofAustria, and in making himself loved by dazzling her.George Villiers placed himself before the glass, as we have said,restored the undulations to his beautiful hair, which the weightof his hat had disordered, twisted his mustache, and, his heartswelling with joy, happy and proud at being near the moment hehad so long sighed for, he smiled upon himself with pride andhope.

    At this moment a door concealed in the tapestry opened, and awoman appeared.  Buckingham saw this apparition in the glass; heuttered a cry.  It was the queen!

    Anne of Austria was then twenty-six or twenty-seven years of age;that is to say, she was in the full splendor of her beauty.Her carriage was that of a queen or a goddess; her eyes, whichcast the brilliancy of emeralds, were perfectly beautiful, andyet were at the same time full of sweetness and majesty.Her mouth was small and rosy; and although her underlip, likethat of all princes of the House of Austria, protruded slightlybeyond the other, it was eminently lovely in its smile, but asprofoundly disdainful in its contempt.

    Her skin was admired for its velvety softness; her hands and armswere of surpassing beauty, all the poets of the time singing themas incomparable.

    Lastly, her hair, which, from being light in her youth, hadbecome chestnut, and which she wore curled very plainly, and withmuch powder, admirably set off her face, in which the most rigidcritic could only have desired a little less rouge, and the mostfastidious sculptor a little more fineness in the nose.Buckingham remained for a moment dazzled.  Never had Anna ofAustria appeared to him so beautiful, amid balls, fetes, orcarousals, as she appeared to him at this moment, dressed in asimple robe of white satin, and accompanied by Donna Estafania--the only one of her Spanish women who had not been driven fromher by the jealousy of the king or by the persecutions ofRichelieu.

    Anne of Austria took two steps forward.  Buckingham threw himselfat her feet, and before the queen could prevent him, kissed thehem of her robe.

    "Duke, you already know that it is not I who caused you to bewritten to."

    "Yes, yes, madame!  Yes, your Majesty!" cried the duke. "I knowthat I must have been mad, senseless, to believe that snow wouldbecome animated or marble warm; but what then!  They who lovebelieve easily in love.  Besides, I have lost nothing by thisjourney because I see you."

    "Yes," replied Anne, "but you know why and how I see you;because, insensible to all my sufferings, you persist inremaining in a city where, by remaining, you run the risk of yourlife, and make me run the risk of my honor.  I see you to tellyou that everything separates us--the depths of the sea, theenmity of kingdoms, the sanctity of vows.  It is sacrilege tostruggle against so many things, my Lord.  In short, I see you totell you that we must never see each other again.""Speak on, madame, speak on, Queen," said Buckingham; "thesweetness of your voice covers the harshness of your words.  Youtalk of sacrilege!  Why, the sacrilege is the separation of twohearts formed by God for each other."

    "My Lord," cried the queen, "you forget that I have never saidthat I love you."

    "But you have never told me that you did not love me; and truly,to speak such words to me would be, on the part of your Majesty,too great an ingratitude.  For tell me, where can you find a lovelike mine--a love which neither time, nor absence, not despaircan extinguish, a love which contents itself with a lost ribbon,a stray look, or a chance word?  It is now three years, madame,since I saw you for the first time, and during those three yearsI have loved you thus.  Shall I tell you each ornament of yourtoilet?  Mark!  I see you now.  You were seated upon cushions inthe Spanish fashion; you wore a robe of green satin embroideredwith gold and silver, hanging sleeves knotted upon your beautifularms--those lovely arms--with large diamonds.  You wore a closeruff, a small cap upon your head of the same color as your robe,and in that cap a heron's feather.  Hold!  Hold!  I shut my eyes,and I can see you as you then were; I open them again, and I seewhat you are now--a hundred time more beautiful!""What folly," murmured Anne of Austria, who had not the courageto find fault with the duke for having so well preserved herportrait in his heart, "what folly to feed a useless passion withsuch remembrances!"

    "And upon what then must I live?  I have nothing but memory.  Itis my happiness, my treasure, my hope.  Every time I see you is afresh diamond  which I enclose in the casket of my heart.  Thisis the fourth which you have let fall and I have picked up; forin three years, madame, I have only seen you four times--thefirst, which I have described to you; the second, at the mansionof Madame de Chevreuse; the third, in the gardens of Amiens.""Duke," said the queen, blushing, "never speak of that evening.""Oh, let us speak of it; on the contrary, let us speak of it!That is the most happy and brilliant evening of my life!  Youremember what a beautiful night it was?  How soft and perfumedwas the air; how lovely the blue heavens and star-enameled sky!Ah, then, madame, I was able for one instant to be alone withyou.  Then you were about to tell me all--the isolation of yourlife, the griefs of your heart.  You leaned upon my arm--uponthis, madame!  I felt, in bending my head toward you, yourbeautiful hair touch my cheek; and every time that it touched meI trembled from head to foot.  Oh, Queen!  Queen!  You do notknow what felicity from heaven, what joys from paradise, arecomprised in a moment like that.  Take my wealth, my fortune, myglory, all the days I have to live, for such an instant, for anight like that.  For that night, madame, that night you lovedme, I will swear it."

    "My Lord, yes; it is possible that the influence of the place,the charm of the beautiful evening, the fascination of yourlook--the thousand circumstances, in short, which sometimes uniteto destroy a woman--were grouped around me on that fatal evening;but, my Lord, you saw the queen come to the aid of the woman whofaltered.  At the first word you dared to utter, at the firstfreedom to which I had to reply, I called for help.""Yes, yes, that is true.  And any other love but mine would havesunk beneath this ordeal; but my love came out from it moreardent and more eternal.  You believed that you would fly from meby returning to Paris; you believed that I would not dare to quitthe treasure over which my master had charged me to watch.  Whatto me were all the treasures in the world, or all the kings ofthe earth!  Eight days after, I was back again, madame.  Thattime you had nothing to say to me; I had risked my life and favorto see you but for a second.  I did not even touch your hand, andyou pardoned me on seeing me so submissive and so repentant.""Yes, but calumny seized upon all those follies in which I tookno part, as you well know, my Lord.  The king, excited by thecardinal, made a terrible clamor.  Madame de Vernet was drivenfrom me, Putange was exiled, Madame de Chevreuse fell intodisgrace, and when you wished to come back as ambassador toFrance, the king himself--remember, my lord--the king himselfopposed to it."

    "Yes, and France is about to pay for her king's refusal with awar.  I am not allowed to see you, madame, but you shall everyday hear of me.  What object, think you, have this expedition toRe and this league with the Protestants of La Rochelle which I amprojecting?  The pleasure of seeing you.  I have no hope ofpenetrating, sword in hand, to Paris, I know that well.  But thiswar may bring round a peace; this peace will require anegotiator; that negotiator will be me.  They will not dare torefuse me then; and I will return to Paris, and will see youagain, and will be happy for an instant.  Thousands of men, it istrue, will have to pay for my happiness with their lives; butwhat is that to me, provided I see you again!  All this isperhaps folly--perhaps insanity; but tell me what woman has alover more truly in love; what queen a servant more ardent?""My Lord, my Lord, you invoke in your defense things which accuseyou more strongly.  All these proofs of love which you would giveme are almost crimes."

    "Because you do not love me, madame!  If you loved me, you wouldview all this otherwise.  If you loved me, oh, if you loved me,that would be too great happiness, and I should run mad.  Ah,Madame de Chevreuse was less cruel than you.  Holland loved her,and she responded to his love."

    "Madame de Chevreuse was not queen," murmured Anne of Austria,overcome, in spite of herself, by the expression of so profound apassion.

    "You would love me, then, if you were not queen!  Madame, saythat you would love me then!  I can believe that it is thedignity of your rank alone which makes you cruel to me; I canbelieve that you had been Madame de Chevreuse, poor Buckinghammight have hoped.  Thanks for those sweet words!  Oh, mybeautiful sovereign, a hundred times, thanks!"

    "Oh, my Lord!  You have ill understood, wrongly interpreted; Idid not mean to say--"

    "Silence, silence!" cried the duke.  "If I am happy in an error,do not have the cruelty to lift me from it.  You have told meyourself, madame, that I have been drawn into a snare; I,perhaps, may leave my life in it--for, although it may bestrange, I have for some time had a presentiment that I shouldshortly die."  And the duke smiled, with a smile at once sad andcharming.

    "Oh, my God!" cried Anne of Austria, with an accent of terrorwhich proved how much greater an interest she took in the dukethan she ventured to tell.

    "I do not tell you this, madame, to terrify you; no, it is evenridiculous for me to name it to you, and, believe me, I take noheed of such dreams.  But the words you have just spoken, thehope you have almost given me, will have richly paid all--were itmy life."

    "Oh, but I," said Anne, "I also, duke, have had presentiments; Ialso have had dreams.  I dreamed that I saw you lying bleeding,wounded."

    "In the left side, was it not, and with a knife?" interruptedBuckingham.

    "Yes, it was so, my Lord, it was so--in the left side, and with aknife.  Who can possibly have told you I had had that dream?  Ihave imparted it to no one but my God, and that in my prayers.""I ask for no more.  You love me, madame; it is enough.""I love you, I?"

    "Yes, yes.  Would God send the same dreams to you as to me if youdid not love me?  Should we have the same presentiments if ourexistences did not touch at the heart?  You love me, my beautifulqueen, and you will weep for me?"

    "Oh, my God, my God!" cried Anne of Austria, "this is more than Ican bear.  In the name of heaven, Duke, leave me, go!  I do notknow whether I love you or love you not; but what I know is thatI will not be perjured.  Take pity on me, then, and go!  Oh, ifyou are stuck in France, if you die in France, if I could imaginethat your love for me was the cause of your death, I could notconsole myself; I should run mad.  Depart then, depart, I imploreyou!"

    "Oh, how beautiful you are thus!  Oh, how I love you!" saidBuckingham.

    "Go, go, I implore you, and return hereafter!  Come back asambassador, come back as minister, come back surrounded withguards who will defend you, with servants who will watch overyou, and then I shall no longer fear for your days, and I shallbe happy in seeing you."

    "Oh, is this true what you say?"

    "Yes."

    "Oh, then, some pledge of your indulgence, some object which camefrom you, and may remind me that I have not been dreaming;something you have worn, and that I may wear in my turn--a ring,a necklace, a chain."

    "Will you depart--will you depart, if I give you that youdemand?"

    "Yes."

    "This very instant?"

    "Yes."

    "You will leave France, you will return to England?""I will, I swear to you."

    "Wait, then, wait."

    Anne of Austria re-entered her apartment, and came out againalmost immediately, holding a rosewood casket in her hand, withher cipher encrusted with gold.

    "Her, my Lord, here," said she, "keep this in memory of me."Buckingham took the casket, and fell a second time on his knees."You have promised me to go," said the queen.

    "And I keep my word.  Your hand, madame, your hand, and Idepart!"

    Anne of Austria stretched forth her hand, closing her eyes, andleaning with the other upon Estafania, for she felt that herstrength was about to fail her.

    Buckingham pressed his lips passionately to that beautiful hand,and then rising, said, "Within six months, if I am not dead, Ishall have seen you again, madame--even if I have to overturn theworld."  And faithful to the promise he had made, he rushed outof the apartment.

    In the corridor he met Mme. Bonacieux, who waited for him, andwho, with the same precautions and the same good luck, conductedhim out of the Louvre.

    13  MONSIEUR BONACIEUX

    There was in all this, as may have been observed, one personageconcerned, of whom, notwithstanding his precarious position, wehave appeared to take but very little notice.  This personage wasM. Bonacieux, the respectable martyr of the political and amorousintrigues which entangled themselves so nicely together at thisgallant and chivalric period.

    Fortunately, the reader may remember, or may not remember--fortunately we have promised not to lose sight of him.The officers who arrested him conducted him straight to theBastille, where he passed trembling before a party of soldierswho were loading their muskets.  Thence, introduced into a half-subterranean gallery, he became, on the part of those who hadbrought him, the object of the grossest insults and the harshesttreatment.  The officers perceived that they had not to deal witha gentleman, and they treated him like a very peasant.At the end of half an hour or thereabouts, a clerk came to put anend to his tortures, but not to his anxiety, by giving the orderto conduct M. Bonacieux to the Chamber of Examination.Ordinarily, prisoners were interrogated in their cells; but theydid not do so with M. Bonacieux.

    Two guards attended the mercer who made him traverse a court andenter a corridor in which were three sentinels, opened a door andpushed him unceremoniously into a low room, where the onlyfurniture was a table, a chair, and a commissary.  The commissarywas seated in the chair, and was writing at the table.The two guards led the prisoner toward the table, and upon a signfrom the commissary drew back so far as to be unable to hearanything.

    The commissary, who had till this time held his head down overhis papers, looked up to see what sort of person he had to dowith.  This commissary was a man of very repulsive mien, with apointed nose, with yellow and salient cheek bones, with eyessmall but keen and penetrating, and an expression of countenanceresembling at once the polecat and the fox.  His head, supportedby a long and flexible neck, issued from his large black robe,balancing itself with a motion very much like that of thetortoise thrusting his head out of his shell.  He began by askingM. Bonacieux his name, age, condition, and abode.The accused replied that his name was Jacques Michel Bonacieux,that he was fifty-one years old, a retired mercer, and lived Ruedes Fossoyeurs, No. 14.

    The commissary then, instead of continuing to interrogate him,made him a long speech upon the danger there is for an obscurecitizen to meddle with public matters.  He complicated thisexordium by an exposition in which he painted the power and thedeeds of the cardinal, that incomparable minister, that conquerorof past minister, that conqueror of past ministers, that examplefor ministers to come--deeds and power which none could thwartwith impunity.

    After this second part of his discourse, fixing his hawk's eyeupon poor Bonacieux, he bade him reflect upon the gravity of hissituation.

    The reflections of the mercer were already made; he cursed theinstant when M. Laporte formed the idea of marrying him to hisgoddaughter had been received as Lady of the Linen to herMajesty.

    At bottom the character of M. Bonacieux was one of profoundselfishness mixed with sordid avarice, the whole seasoned withextreme cowardice.  The love with which his young wife hadinspired him was a secondary sentiment, and was not strong enoughto contend with the primitive feelings we have just enumerated.Bonacieux indeed reflected on what had just been said to him."But, Monsieur Commissary," said he, calmly, "believe that I knowand appreciate, more than anybody, the merit of the incomparableeminence by whom we have the honor to be governed.""Indeed?" asked the commissary, with an air of doubt.  "If thatis really so, how came you in the Bastille?"

    "How I came there, or rather why I am there," replied Bonacieux,"that is entirely impossible for me to tell you, because I don'tknow myself; but to a certainty it is not for having, knowinglyat least, disobliged Monsieur the Cardinal."

    "You must, nevertheless, have committed a crime, since you arehere and are accused of high treason."

    "Of high treason!" cried Bonacieux, terrified; "of high treason!How is it possible for a poor mercer, who detests Huguenots andwho abhors Spaniards, to be accused of high treason?  Consider,monsieur, the thing is absolutely impossible."

    "Monsieur Bonacieux," said the commissary, looking at the accusedas if his little eyes had the faculty of reading to the verydepths of hearts, "you have a wife?"

    "Yes, monsieur," replied the mercer, in a tremble, feeling thatit was at this point affairs were likely to become perplexing;"that is to say, I HAD one."

    "What, you 'had one'?  What have you done with her, then, if youhave her no longer?"

    "They have abducted her, monsieur."

    "They have abducted her?  Ah!"

    Bonacieux inferred from this "Ah" that the affair grew more andmore intricate.

    "They have abducted her," added the commissary; "and do you knowthe man who has committed this deed?"

    "I think I know him."

    "Who is he?"

    "Remember that I affirm nothing, Monsieur the Commissary, andthat I only suspect."

    "Whom do you suspect?  Come, answer freely."

    M. Bonacieux was in the greatest perplexity possible.  Had hebetter deny everything or tell everything?  By denying all, itmight be suspected that he must know too much to avow; byconfessing all he might prove his good will.  He decided, then,to tell all.

    "I suspect," said he, "a tall, dark man, of lofty carriage, whohas the air of a great lord.  He has followed us several times,as I think, when I have waited for my wife at the wicket of theLouvre to escort her home."

    The commissary now appeared to experience a little uneasiness."And his name?" said he.

    "Oh, as to his name, I know nothing about it; but if I were everto meet him, I should recognize him in an instant, I will answerfor it, were he among a thousand persons."

    The face of the commissary grew still darker.

    "You should recognize him among a thousand, say you?" continuedhe.

    "That is to say," cried Bonacieux, who saw he had taken a falsestep, "that is to say--"

    "You have answered that you should recognize him," said thecommissary.  "That is all very well, and enough for today; beforewe proceed further, someone must be informed that you know theravisher of your wife."

    "But I have not told you that I know him!" cried Bonacieux, indespair.  "I told you, on the contrary--"

    "Take away the prisoner," said the commissary to the two guards."Where must we place him?" demanded the chief.

    "In a dungeon."

    "Which?"

    "Goof Lord!  In the first one handy, provided it is safe," saidthe commissary, with an indifference which penetrated poorBonacieux with horror.

    "Alas, alas!" said he to himself, "misfortune is over my head; mywife must have committed some frightful crime.  They believe meher accomplice, and will punish me with her.  She must havespoken; she must have confessed everything--a woman is so weak!A dungeon!  The first he comes to!  That's it!  A night is soonpassed; and tomorrow to the wheel, to the gallows!  Oh, my God,my God, have pity on me!"

    Without listening the least in the world to the lamentations ofM. Bonacieux--lamentations to which, besides, they must have beenpretty well accustomed--the two guards took the prisoner each byan arm, and led him away, while the commissary wrote a letter inhaste and dispatched it by an officer in waiting.Bonacieux could not close his eyes; not because his dungeon wasso very disagreeable, but because his uneasiness was so great.He sat all night on his stool, starting at the least noise; andwhen the first rays of the sun penetrated into his chamber, thedawn itself appeared to him to have taken funereal tints.All at once he heard his bolts drawn, and made a terrified bound.He believed they were come to conduct him to the scaffold; sothat when he saw merely and simply, instead of the executioner heexpected, only his commissary of the preceding evening, attendedby his clerk, he was ready to embrace them both.

    "Your affair has become more complicated since yesterday evening,my good man, and I advise you to tell the whole truth; for yourrepentance alone can remove the anger of the cardinal.""Why, I am ready to tell everything," cried Bonacieux, "at least,all that I know.  Interrogate me, I entreat you!""Where is your wife, in the first place?"

    "Why, did not I tell you she had been stolen from me?""Yes, but yesterday at five o'clock in the afternoon, thanks toyou, she escaped."

    "My wife escaped!" cried Bonacieux.  "Oh, unfortunate creature!Monsieur, if she has escaped, it is not my fault, I swear.""What business had you, then, to go into the chamber of MonsieurD'Artagnan, your neighbor, with whom you had a long conferenceduring the day?"

    "Ah, yes, Monsieur Commissary; yes, that is true, and I confessthat I was in the wrong.  I did go to Monsieur D'Artagnan's.""What was the aim of that visit?"

    "To beg him to assist me in finding my wife.  I believed I had aright to endeavor to find her.  I was deceived, as it appears,and I ask your pardon."

    "And what did Monsieur d'Artagnan reply?"

    "Monsieur d'Artagnan promised me his assistance; but I soon foundout that he was betraying me."

    "You impose upon justice.  Monsieur d'Artagnan made a compactwith you; and in virtue of that compact put to flight the policewho had arrested your wife, and has placed her beyond reach.""Fortunately, Monsieur d'Artagnan is in our hands, and you shallbe confronted with him."

    "By my faith, I ask no better," cried Bonacieux; "I shall not besorry to see the face of an acquaintance."

    "Bring in the Monsieur d'Artagnan," said the commissary to theguards.  The two guards led in Athos.

    "Monsieur d'Artagnan," said the commissary, addressing Athos,"declare all that passed yesterday between you and Monsieur.""But," cried Bonacieux, "this is not Monsieur d'Artagnan whom youshow me."

    "What!  Not Monsieur d'Artagnan?" exclaimed the commissary."Not the least in the world," replied Bonacieux.

    "What is this gentleman's name?" asked the commissary."I cannot tell you; I don't know him."

    "How!  You don't know him?"

    "No."

    "Did you never see him?"

    "Yes, I have seen him, but I don't know what he calls himself.""Your name?" replied the commissary.

    "Athos," replied the Musketeer.

    "But that is not a man's name; that is the name of a mountain,"cried the poor questioner, who began to lose his head."That is my name," said Athos, quietly.

    "But you said that your name was D'Artagnan."

    "Who, I?"

    "Yes, you."

    "Somebody said to me, 'You are Monsieur d'Artagnan?' I answered,'You think so?'  My guards exclaimed that they were sure of it.I did not wish to contradict them; besides, I might be deceived.""Monsieur, you insult the majesty of justice."

    "Not at all," said Athos, calmly.

    "You are Monsieur d'Artagnan."

    "You see, monsieur, that you say it again."

    "But I tell you, Monsieur Commissary," cried Bonacieux, in histurn, "there is not the least doubt about the matter.  Monsieurd'Artagnan is my tenant, although he does not pay me my rent--andeven better on that account ought I to know him.  MonsieurDessessart's Guards, and this gentleman is in the company ofMonsieur de Treville's Musketeers.  Look at his uniform, MonsieurCommissary, look at his uniform!"

    "That's true," murmured the commissary; "PARDIEU, that's true."At this moment the door was opened quickly, and a messenger,introduced by one of the gatekeepers of the Bastille, gave aletter to the commissary.

    "Oh, unhappy woman!" cried the commissary.

    "How?  What do you say?  Of whom do you speak?  It is not of mywife, I hope!"

    "On the contrary, it is of her.  Yours is a pretty business.""But," said the agitated mercer, "do me the pleasure, monsieur,to tell me how my own proper affair can become worse by anythingmy wife does while I am in prison?"

    "Because that which she does is part of a plan concerted betweenyou--of an infernal plan."

    "I swear to you, Monsieur Commissary, that you are in theprofoundest error, that I know nothing in the world about what mywife had to do, that I am entirely a stranger to what she hasdone; and that if she has committed any follies, I renounce her,I abjure her, I curse her!"

    "Bah!" said Athos to the commissary, "if you have no more need ofme, send me somewhere.  Your Monsieur Bonacieux is verytiresome."

    The commissary designated by the same gesture Athos andBonacieux, "Let them be guarded more closely than ever.""And yet," said Athos, with his habitual calmness, "if it beMonsieur d'Artagnan who is concerned in this matter, I do notperceive how I can take his place."

    "Do as I bade you," cried the commissary, "and preserve absolutesecrecy.  You understand!"

    Athos shrugged his shoulders, and followed his guards silently,while M. Bonacieux uttered lamentations enough to break the heartof a tiger.

    They locked the mercer in the same dungeon where he had passedthe night, and left him to himself during the day.  Bonacieuxwept all day, like a true mercer, not being at all a militaryman, as he himself informed us.  In the evening, about nineo'clock, at the moment he had made up his mind to go to bed, heheard steps in his corridor.  These steps drew near to hisdungeon, the door was thrown open, and the guards appeared."Follow me," said an officer, who came up behind the guards."Follow you!" cried Bonacieux, "follow you at this hour!  Where,my God?"

    "Where we have orders to lead you."

    "But that is not an answer."

    "It is, nevertheless, the only one we can give."

    "Ah, my God, my God!" murmured the poor mercer, "now, indeed, Iam lost!"  And he followed the guards who came for him,mechanically and without resistance.

    He passed along the same corridor as before, crossed one court,then a second side of a building; at length, at the gate of theentrance court he found a carriage surrounded by four guards onhorseback.  They made him enter this carriage, the officer placedhimself by his side, the door was locked, and they were left in arolling prison.  The carriage was put in motion as slowly as afuneral car.  Through the closely fastened windows the prisonercould perceive the houses and the pavement, that was all; but,true Parisian as he was, Bonacieux could recognize every streetby the milestones, the signs, and the lamps.  At the moment ofarriving at St. Paul--the spot where such as were condemned atthe Bastille were executed--he was near fainting and crossedhimself twice.  He thought the carriage was about to stop there.The carriage, however, passed on.

    Farther on, a still greater terror seized him on passing by thecemetery of St. Jean, where state criminals were buried.  Onething, however, reassured him; he remembered that before theywere buried their heads were generally cut off, and he felt thathis head was still on his shoulders.  But when he saw thecarriage take the way to La Greve, when he perceived the pointedroof of the Hotel de Ville, and the carriage passed under thearcade, he believed it was over with him.  He wished to confessto the officer, and upon his refusal, uttered such pitiable criesthat the officer told him that if he continued to deafen himthus, he should put a gag in his mouth.

    This measure somewhat reassured Bonacieux.  If they meant toexecute him at La Greve, it could scarcely be worth while to gaghim, as they had nearly reached the place of execution.  Indeed,the carriage crossed the fatal spot without stopping.  Thereremained, then, no other place to fear but the Traitor's Cross;the carriage was taking the direct road to it.

    This time there was no longer any doubt; it was at the Traitor'sCross that lesser criminals were executed.  Bonacieux hadflattered himself in believing himself worthy of St. Paul or ofthe Place de Greve; it was at the Traitor's Cross that hisjourney and his destiny were about to end!  He could not yet seethat dreadful cross, but he felt somehow as if it were coming tomeet him.  When he was within twenty paces of it, he heard anoise of people and the carriage stopped.  This was more thanpoor Bonacieux could endure, depressed as he was by thesuccessive emotions which he had experienced; he uttered a feeblegroan which night have been taken for the last sigh of a dyingman, and fainted.

    14  THE MAN OF MEUNG

    The crowd was caused, not by the expectation of a man to behanged, but by the contemplation of a man who was hanged.The carriage, which had been stopped for a minute, resumed itsway, passed through the crowd, threaded the Rue St. Honore,turned into the Rue des Bons Enfants, and stopped before a lowdoor.

    The door opened; two guards received Bonacieux in their arms fromthe officer who supported him.  They carried him through analley, up a flight of stairs, and deposited him in anantechamber.

    All these movements had been effected mechanically, as far as hewas concerned.  He had walked as one walks in a dream; he had aglimpse of objects as through a fog.  His ears had perceivedsounds without comprehending them; he might have been executed atthat moment without his making a single gesture in his owndefense or uttering a cry to implore mercy.

    He remained on the bench, with his back leaning against the walland his hands hanging down, exactly on the spot where the guardsplaced him.

    On looking around him, however, as he could perceive nothreatening object, as nothing indicated that he ran any realdanger, as the bench was comfortably covered with a well-stuffedcushion, as the wall was ornamented with a beautiful Cordovaleather, and as large red damask curtains, fastened back by goldclasps, floated before the window, he perceived by degrees thathis fear was exaggerated, and he began to turn his head to theright and the left, upward and downward.

    At this movement, which nobody opposed, he resumed a littlecourage, and ventured to draw up one leg and then the other.  Atlength, with the help of his two hands he lifted himself from thebench, and found himself on his feet.

    At this moment an officer with a pleasant face opened a door,continued to exchange some words with a person in the nextchamber and then came up to the prisoner.  "Is your nameBonacieux?" said he.

    "Yes, Monsieur Officer," stammered the mercer, more dead thanalive, "at your service."

    "Come in," said the officer.

    And he moved out of the way to let the mercer pass.  The latterobeyed without reply, and entered the chamber, where he appearedto be expected.

    It was a large cabinet, close and stifling, with the wallsfurnished with arms offensive and defensive, and in which therewas already a fire, although it was scarcely the end of the monthof September.  A square table, covered with books and papers,upon which was unrolled an immense plan of the city of LaRochelle, occupied the center of the room.

    Standing before the chimney was a man of middle height, of ahaughty, proud mien; with piercing eyes, a large brow, and a thinface, which was made still longer by a ROYAL (or IMPERIAL, as itis now called), surmounted by a pair of mustaches.  Although thisman was scarcely thirty-six or thirty-seven years of age, hair,mustaches, and royal, all began to be gray.  This man, except asword, had all the appearance of a soldier; and his buff bootsstill slightly covered with dust, indicated that he had been onhorseback in the course of the day.

    This man was Armand Jean Duplessis, Cardinal de Richelieu; notsuch as he is now represented--broken down like an old man,suffering like a martyr, his body bent, his voice failing, buriedin a large armchair as in an anticipated tomb; no longer livingbut by the strength of his genius, and no longer maintaining thestruggle with Europe but by the eternal application of histhoughts--but such as he really was at this period; that is tosay, an active and gallant cavalier, already weak of body, butsustained by that moral power which made of him one of the mostextraordinary men that ever lived, preparing, after havingsupported the Duc de Nevers in his duchy of Mantua, after havingtaken Nimes, Castres, and Uzes, to drive the English from theIsle of Re and lay siege to La Rochelle.

    At first sight, nothing denoted the cardinal; and it wasimpossible for those who did not know his face to guess in whosepresence they were.

    The poor mercer remained standing at the door, while the eyes ofthe personage we have just described were fixed upon him, andappeared to wish to penetrate even into the depths of the past."Is this that Bonacieux?" asked he, after a moment of silence."Yes, monseigneur," replied the officer.

    "That's well.  Give me those papers, and leave us."The officer took from the table the papers pointed out, gave themto him who asked for them, bowed to the ground, and retired.Bonacieux recognized in these papers his interrogatories of theBastille.  From time to time the man by the chimney raised hiseyes from the writings, and plunged them like poniards into theheart of the poor mercer.

    At the end of ten minutes of reading and ten seconds ofexamination, the cardinal was satisfied.

    "That head has never conspired," murmured he, "but it mattersnot; we will see."

    "You are accused of high treason," said the cardinal, slowly."So I have been told already, monseigneur," cried Bonacieux,giving his interrogator the title he had heard the officer givehim, "but I swear to you that I know nothing about it."The cardinal repressed a smile.

    "You have conspired with your wife, with Madame de Chevreuse, andwith my Lord Duke of Buckingham."

    "Indeed, monseigneur," responded the mercer, "I have heard herpronounce all those names."

    "And on what occasion?"

    "She said that the Cardinal de Richelieu had drawn the Duke ofBuckingham to Paris to ruin him and to ruin the queen.""She said that?" cried the cardinal, with violence."Yes, monseigneur, but I told her she was wrong to talk aboutsuch things; and that his Eminence was incapable--""Hold your tongue!  You are stupid," replied the cardinal."That's exactly what my wife said, monseigneur."

    "Do you know who carried off your wife?"

    "No, monsigneur."

    "You have suspicions, nevertheless?"

    "Yes, monsigneur; but these suspicions appeared to bedisagreeable to Monsieur the Commissary, and I no longer havethem."

    "Your wife has escaped.  Did you know that?"

    "No, monseigneur.  I learned it since I have been in prison, andthat from the conversation of Monsieur the Commissary--an amiableman."

    The cardinal repressed another smile.

    "Then you are ignorant of what has become of your wife since herflight."

    "Absolutely, monseigneur; but she has most likely returned to theLouvre."

    "At one o'clock this morning she had not returned.""My God!  What can have become of her, then?"

    "We shall know, be assured.  Nothing is concealed from thecardinal; the cardinal knows everything."

    "In that case, monseigneur, do you believe the cardinal will beso kind as to tell me what has become of my wife?""Perhaps he may; but you must, in the first place, reveal to thecardinal all you know of your wife's relations with Madame deChevreuse."

    "But, monseigneur, I know nothing about them; I have never seenher."

    "When you went to fetch your wife from the Louvre, did you alwaysreturn directly home?"

    "Scarcely ever; she had business to transact with linen drapers,to whose houses I conducted her."

    "And how many were there of these linen drapers?""Two, monseigneur."

    "And where did they live?"

    "One in Rue de Vaugirard, the other Rue de la Harpe.""Did you go into these houses with her?"

    "Never, monseigneur; I waited at the door."

    "And what excuse did she give you for entering all alone?""She gave me none; she told me to wait, and I waited.""You are a very complacent husband, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux," said the cardinal."He calls me his dear Monsieur," said the mercer to himself."PESTE!  Matters are going all right."

    "Should you know those doors again?"

    "Yes."

    "Do you know the numbers?"

    "Yes."

    "What are they?"

    "No. 25 in the Rue de Vaugirard; 75 in the Rue de la Harpe.""That's well," said the cardinal.

    At these words he took up a silver bell, and rang it; the officerentered.

    "Go," said he, in a subdued voice, "and find Rochefort.  Tell himto come to me immediately, if he has returned."

    "The count is here," said the officer, "and requests to speakwith your Eminence instantly."

    "Let him come in, then!" said the cardinal, quickly.The officer sprang out of the apartment with that alacrity whichall the servants of the cardinal displayed in obeying him."To your Eminence!" murmured Bonacieux, rolling his eyes round inastonishment.

    Five seconds has scarcely elapsed after the disappearance of theofficer, when the door opened, and a new personage entered."It is he!" cried Bonacieux.

    "He!  What he?" asked the cardinal.

    "The man who abducted my wife."

    The cardinal rang a second time.  The officer reappeared."Place this man in the care of his guards again, and let him waittill I send for him."

    "No, monseigneur, no, it is not he!" cried Bonacieux; "no, I wasdeceived.  This is quite another man, and does not resemble himat all.  Monsieur is, I am sure, an honest man."

    "Take away that fool!" said the cardinal.

    The officer took Bonacieux by the arm, and led him into theantechamber, where he found his two guards.

    The newly introduced personage followed Bonacieux impatientlywith his eyes till he had gone out; and the moment the doorclosed, "They have seen each other;" said he, approaching thecardinal eagerly.

    "Who?" asked his Eminence.

    "He and she."

    "The queen and the duke?" cried Richelieu.

    "Yes."

    "Where?"

    "At the Louvre."

    "Are you sure of it?"

    "Perfectly sure."

    "Who told you of it?"

    "Madame de Lannoy, who is devoted to your Eminence, as you know.""Why did she not let me know sooner?"

    "Whether by chance or mistrust, the queen made Madame de Surgissleep in her chamber, and detained her all day."

    "Well, we are beaten!  Now let us try to take our revenge.""I will assist you with all my heart, monseigneur; be assured ofthat."

    "How did it come about?"

    "At half past twelve the queen was with her women--""Where?"

    "In her bedchamber--"

    "Go on."

    "When someone came and brought her a handkerchief from herlaundress."

    "And then?"

    "The queen immediately exhibited strong emotion; and despite therouge with which her face was covered evidently turned pale--""And then, and then?"

    "She then arose, and with altered voice, 'Ladies,' said she,'wait for me ten minutes, I shall soon return.' She then openedthe door of her alcove, and went out."

    "Why did not Madame de Lannoy come and inform you instantly?""Nothing was certain; besides, her Majesty had said, 'Ladies,wait for me,' and she did not dare to disobey the queen.""How long did the queen remain out of the chamber?""Three-quarters of an hour."

    "None of her women accompanied her?"

    "Only Donna Estafania."

    "Did she afterward return?"

    "Yes; but only to take a little rosewood casket, with her cipherupon it, and went out again immediately."

    "And when she finally returned, did she bring that casket withher?"

    "No."

    "Does Madame de Lannoy know what was in that casket?""Yes; the diamond studs which his Majesty gave the queen.""And she came back without this casket?"

    "Yes."

    "Madame de Lannoy, then, is of opinion that she gave them toBuckingham?"

    "She is sure of it."

    "How can she be so?"

    "In the course of the day Madame de Lannoy, in her quality oftire-woman of the queen, looked for this casket, appeared uneasyat not finding it, and at length asked information of the queen.""And then the queen?"

    "The queen became exceedingly red, and replied that having in theevening broken one of those studs, she had sent it to hergoldsmith to be repaired."

    "He must be called upon, and so ascertain if the thing be true ornot."

    "I have just been with him."

    "And the goldsmith?"

    "The goldsmith has heard nothing of it."

    "Well, well!  Rochefort, all is not lost; and perhaps--perhapseverything is for the best."

    "The fact is that I do not doubt your Eminence's genius--""Will repair the blunders of his agent--is that it?""That is exactly what I was going to say, if your Eminence hadlet me finish my sentence."

    "Meanwhile, do you know where the Duchesse de Chevreuse and theDuke of Buckingham are now concealed?"

    "No, monseigneur; my people could tell me nothing on that head.""But I know."

    "You, monseigneur?"

    "Yes; or at least I guess.  They were, one in the Rue deVaugirard, No. 25; the other in the Rue de la Harpe, No. 75.""Does your Eminence command that they both be instantlyarrested?"

    "It will be too late; they will be gone."

    "But still, we can make sure that they are so."

    "Take ten men of my Guardsmen, and search the two housesthoroughly."

    "Instantly, monseigneur."  And Rochefort went hastily out of theapartment.

    The cardinal being left alone, reflected for an instant and thenrang the bell a third time.  The same officer appeared."Bring the prisoner in again," said the cardinal.M. Bonacieux was introduced afresh, and upon a sign from thecardinal, the officer retired.

    "You have deceived me!" said the cardinal, sternly."I," cried Bonacieux, "I deceive your Eminence!"

    "Your wife, in going to Rue de Vaugirard and Rue de la Harpe, didnot go to find linen drapers."

    "Then why did she go, just God?"

    "She went to meet the Duchesse de Chevreuse and the Duke of Buckingham.""Yes," cried Bonacieux, recalling all his remembrances of thecircumstances, "yes, that's it.  Your Eminence is right.  I toldmy wife several times that it was surprising that linen drapersshould live in such houses as those, in houses that had no signs;but she always laughed at me.  Ah, monseigneur!" continuedBonacieux, throwing himself at his Eminence's feet, "ah, howtruly you are the cardinal, the great cardinal, the man of geniuswhom all the world reveres!"

    The cardinal, however contemptible might be the triumph gainedover so vulgar a being as Bonacieux, did not the less enjoy itfor an instant; then, almost immediately, as if a fresh thoughthas occurred, a smile played upon his lips, and he said, offeringhis hand to the mercer, "Rise, my friend, you are a worthy man.""The cardinal has touched me with his hand!  I have touched thehand of the great man!" cried Bonacieux.  "The great man hascalled me his friend!"

    "Yes, my friend, yes," said the cardinal, with that paternal tonewhich he sometimes knew how to assume, but which deceived nonewho knew him; "and as you have been unjustly suspected, well, youmust be indemnified.  Here, take this purse of a hundredpistoles, and pardon me."

    "I pardon you, monseigneur!" said Bonacieux, hesitating to takethe purse, fearing, doubtless, that this pretended gift was but apleasantry.  "But you are able to have me arrested, you are ableto have me tortured, you are able to have me hanged; you are themaster, and I could not have the least word to say.  Pardon you,monseigneur!  You cannot mean that!"

    "Ah, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, you are generous in this matter.I see it and I thank you for it.  Thus, then, you will take thisbag, and you will go away without being too malcontent.""I go away enchanted."

    "Farewell, then, or rather, AU REVOIR!"

    And the cardinal made him a sign with his hand, to whichBonacieux replied by bowing to the ground.  He then went outbackward, and when he was in the antechamber the cardinal heardhim, in his enthusiasm, crying aloud, "Long life to theMonseigneur!  Long life to his Eminence!  Long life to the greatcardinal!"  The cardinal listened with a smile to this vociferousmanifestation of the feelings of M. Bonacieux; and then, whenBonacieux's cries were no longer audible, "Good!" said he, "thatman would henceforward lay down his life for me."  And thecardinal began to examine with the greatest attention the map ofLa Rochelle, which, as we have said, lay open on the desk,tracing with a pencil the line in which the famous dyke was topass which, eighteen months later, shut up the port of thebesieged city.  As he was in the deepest of his strategicmeditations, the door opened, and Rochefort returned."Well?" said the cardinal, eagerly, rising with a promptitudewhich proved the degree of importance he attached to thecommission with which he had charged the count.

    "Well," said the latter, "a young woman of about twenty-six ortwenty-eight years of age, and a man of from thirty-five toforty, have indeed lodged at the two houses pointed out by yourEminence; but the woman left last night, and the man thismorning."

    "It was they!" cried the cardinal, looking at the clock; "and nowit is too late to have them persued.  The duchess is at Tours,and the duke at Boulogne.  It is in London they must be found.""What are your Eminence's orders?"

    "Not a word of what has passed.  Let the queen remain in perfectsecurity; let her be ignorant that we know her secret.  Let herbelieve that we are in search of some conspiracy or other.  Sendme the keeper of the seals, Seguier."

    "And that man, what has your Eminence done with him?""What man?" asked the cardinal.

    "That Bonacieux."

    "I have done with him all that could be done.  I have made him aspy upon his wife."

    The Comte de Rochefort bowed like a man who acknowledges thesuperiority of the master as great, and retired.

    Left alone, the cardinal seated himself again and wrote a letter,which he secured with his special seal.  Then he rang.  Theofficer entered for the fourth time.

    "Tell Vitray to come to me," said he, "and tell him to get readyfor a journey."

    An instant after, the man he asked for was before him, booted andspurred.

    "Vitray," said he, "you will go with all speed to London.  Youmust not stop an instant on the way.  You will deliver thisletter to Milady.  Here is an order for two hundred pistoles;call upon my treasurer and get the money.  You shall have as muchagain if you are back within six days, and have executed yourcommission well."

    The messenger, without replying a single word, bowed, took theletter, with the order for the two hundred pistoles, and retired.Here is what the letter contained:

    MILADY, Be at the first ball at which the Duke of Buckinghamshall be present.  He will wear on his doublet twelve diamondstuds; get as near to him as you can, and cut off two.As soon as these studs shall be in your possession, inform me.

    15 MEN OF THE ROBE AND MEN OF THE SWORD

    On the day after these events had taken place, Athos not havingreappeared, M. de Treville was informed by D'Artagnan and Porthosof the circumstance.  As to Aramis, he had asked for leave ofabsence for five days, and was gone, it was said, to Rouen onfamily business.

    M. de Treville was the father of his soldiers.  The lowest or theleast known of them, as soon as he assumed the uniform of thecompany, was as sure of his aid and support as if he had been hisown brother.

    He repaired, then, instantly to the office of the LIEUTENANT-CRIMINEL.  The officer who commanded the post of theRed Cross was sent for, and by successive inquiries they learnedthat Athos was then lodged in the Fort l'Eveque.

    Athos had passed through all the examinations we have seenBonacieux undergo.

    We were present at the scene in which the two captives wereconfronted with each other.  Athos, who had till that time saidnothing for fear that D'Artagnan, interrupted in his turn, shouldnot have the time necessary, from this moment declared that hisname was Athos, and not D'Artagnan.  He added that he did notknow either M. or Mme. Bonacieux; that he had never spoken to theone or the other; that he had come, at about ten o'clock in theevening, to pay a visit to his friend M. d'Artagnan, but thattill that hour he had been at M. de Treville's, where he haddined.  "Twenty witnesses," added he, "could attest the fact";and he named several distinguished gentlemen, and among them wasM. le Duc de la Tremouille.

    The second commissary was as much bewildered as the first hadbeen by the simple and firm declaration of the Musketeer, uponwhom he was anxious to take the revenge which men of the robelike at all times to gain over men of the sword; but the name ofM. de Treville, and that of M. de la Tremouille, commanded alittle reflection.

    Athos was then sent to the cardinal; but unfortunately thecardinal was at the Louvre with the king.

    It was precisely at this moment that M. de Treville, on leavingthe residence of the LIEUTENANT-CRIMINEL and the governor of theFort l'Eveque without being able to find Athos, arrived at thepalace.

    As captain of the Musketeers, M. de Treville had the right ofentry at all times.

    It is well known how violent the king's prejudices were againstthe queen, and how carefully these prejudices were kept up by thecardinal, who in affairs of intrigue mistrusted women infinitelymore than men.  One of the grand causes of this prejudice was thefriendship of Anne of Austria for Mme. de Chevreuse.  These twowomen gave him more uneasiness than the war with Spain, thequarrel with England, or the embarrassment of the finances.  Inhis eyes and to his conviction, Mme. de Chevreuse not only servedthe queen in her political intrigues, but, what tormented himstill more, in her amorous intrigues.

    At the first word the cardinal spoke of Mme. de Chevreuse--who,though exiled to Tours and believed to be in that city, had cometo Paris, remained there five days, and outwitted the police--theking flew into a furious passion.  Capricious and unfaithful, theking wished to be called Louis the Just and Louis the Chaste.Posterity will find a difficulty in understanding this character,which history explains only by facts and never by reason.But when the cardinal added that not only Mme. de Chevreuse hadbeen in Paris, but still further, that the queen had renewed withher one of those mysterious correspondences which at that timewas named a CABAL; when he affirmed that he, the cardinal, wasabout to unravel the most closely twisted thread of thisintrigue; that at the moment of arresting in the very act, withall the proofs about her, the queen's emissary to the exiledduchess, a Musketeer had dared to interrupt the course of justiceviolently, by falling sword in hand upon the honest men of thelaw, charged with investigating impartially the whole affair inorder to place it before the eyes of the king--Louis XIII couldnot contain himself, and he made a step toward the queen'sapartment with that pale and mute indignation which, when inbroke out, led this prince to the commission of the most pitilesscruelty.  And yet, in all this, the cardinal had not yet said aword about the Duke of Buckingham.

    At this instant M. de Treville entered, cool, polite, and inirreproachable costume.

    Informed of what had passed by the presence of the cardinal andthe alteration in the king's countenance, M. de Treville felthimself something like Samson before the Philistines.Louis XIII had already placed his hand on the knob of the door;at the noise of M. de Treville's entrance he turned round.  "Youarrive in good time, monsieur," said the king, who, when hispassions were raised to a certain point, could not dissemble; "Ihave learned some fine things concerning your Musketeers.""And I," said Treville, coldly, "I have some pretty things to tellyour Majesty concerning these gownsmen."

    "What?" said the king, with hauteur.

    "I have the honor to inform your Majesty," continued M. deTreville, in the same tone, "that a party of PROCUREURS,commissaries, and men of the police--very estimable people, butvery inveterate, as it appears, against the uniform--have takenupon themselves to arrest in a house, to lead away through theopen street, and throw into the Fort l'Eveque, all upon an orderwhich they have refused to show me, one of my, or rather yourMusketeers, sire, of irreproachable conduct, of an almostillustrious reputation, and whom your Majesty knows favorably,Monsieur Athos."

    "Athos," said the king, mechanically; "yes, certainly I know thatname."

    "Let your Majesty remember," said Treville, "that Monsieur Athosis the Musketeer who, in the annoying duel which you areacquainted with, had the misfortune to wound Monsieur de Cahusacso seriously.  A PROPOS, monseigneur," continued Treville.Addressing the cardinal, "Monsieur de Cahusac is quite recovered,is he not?"

    "Thank you," said the cardinal, biting his lips with anger."Athos, then, went to pay a visit to one of his friends absent atthe time," continued Treville, "to a young Bearnais, a cadet inhis Majesty's Guards, the company of Monsieur Dessessart, butscarcely had he arrived at his friend's and taken up a book,while waiting his return, when a mixed crowd of bailiffs andsoldiers came and laid siege to the house, broke open severaldoors--"

    The cardinal made the king a sign, which signified, "That was onaccount of the affair about which I spoke to you.""We all know that," interrupted the king; "for all that was donefor our service."

    "Then," said Treville, "it was also for your Majesty's servicethat one of my Musketeers, who was innocent, has been seized,that he has been placed between two guards like a malefactor, andthat this gallant man, who has ten times shed his blood in yourMajesty's service and is ready to shed it again, has been paradedthrough the midst of an insolent populace?"

    "Bah!" said the king, who began to be shaken, "was it somanaged?"

    "Monsieur de Treville," said the cardinal, with the greatestphlegm, "does not tell your Majesty that this innocent Musketeer,this gallant man, had only an hour before attacked, sword inhand, four commissaries of inquiry, who were delegated by myselfto examine into an affair of the highest importance.""I defy your Eminence to prove it," cried Treville, with hisGascon freedom and military frankness; "for one hour before,Monsieur Athos, who, I will confide it to your Majesty, is reallya man of the highest quality, did me the honor after having dinedwith me to be conversing in the saloon of my hotel, with the Ducde la Tremouille and the Comte de Chalus, who happened to bethere."

    The king looked at the cardinal.

    "A written examination attests it," said the cardinal, replyingaloud to the mute interrogation of his Majesty; "and the ill-treated people have drawn up the following, which I have thehonor to present to your Majesty."

    "And is the written report of the gownsmen to be placed incomparison with the word of honor of a swordsman?" repliedTreville haughtily.

    "Come, come, Treville, hold your tongue," said the king."If his Eminence entertains any suspicion against one of myMusketeers," said Treville, "the justice of Monsieur the Cardinalis so well known that I demand an inquiry."

    "In the house in which the judicial inquiry was made," continuedthe impassive cardinal, "there lodges, I believe, a youngBearnais, a friend of the Musketeer."

    "Your Eminence means Monsieur d'Artagnan."

    "I mean a young man whom you patronize, Monsieur de Treville.""Yes, your Eminence, it is the same."

    "Do you not suspect this young man of having given bad counsel?""To Athos, to a man double his age?" interrupted Treville.  "No,monseigneur.  Besides, D'Artagnan passed the evening with me.""Well," said the cardinal, "everybody seems to have passed theevening with you."

    "Does your Eminence doubt my word?" said Treville, with a browflushed with anger.

    "No, God forbid," said the cardinal; "only, at what hour was he with you?""Oh, as to that I can speak positively, your Eminence; for as hecame in I remarked that it was but half past nine by the clock,although I had believed it to be later."

    "At what hour did he leave your hotel?"

    "At half past ten--an hour after the event."

    "Well," replied the cardinal, who could not for an instantsuspect the loyalty of Treville, and who felt that the victorywas escaping him, "well, but Athos WAS taken in the house in theRue des Fossoyeurs."

    "Is one friend forbidden to visit another, or a Musketeer of mycompany to fraternize with a Guard of Dessessart's company?""Yes, when the house where he fraternizes is suspected.""That house is suspected, Treville," said the king; "perhaps youdid not know it?"

    "Indeed, sire, I did not.  The house may be suspected; but I denythat it is so in the part of it inhabited my Monsieur d'Artagnan,for I can affirm, sire, if I can believe what he says, that theredoes not exist a more devoted servant of your Majesty, or a moreprofound admirer of Monsieur the Cardinal."

    "Was it not this D'Artagnan who wounded Jussac one day, in thatunfortunate encounter which took place near the Convent of theCarmes-Dechausses?" asked the king, looking at the cardinal, whocolored with vexation.

    "And the next day, Bernajoux. Yes, sire, yes, it is the same; andyour Majesty has a good memory."

    "Come, how shall we decide?" said the king.

    "That concerns your Majesty more than me," said the cardinal.  "Ishould affirm the culpability."

    "And I deny it," said Treville.  "But his Majesty has judges, andthese judges will decide."

    "That is best," said the king.  "Send the case before the judges;it is their business to judge, and they shall judge.""Only," replied Treville, "it is a sad thing that in theunfortunate times in which we live, the purest life, the mostincontestable virtue, cannot exempt a man from infamy andpersecution.  The army, I will answer for it, will be but littlepleased at being exposed to rigorous treatment on account ofpolice affairs."

    The expression was imprudent; but M. de Treville launched it withknowledge of his cause.  He was desirous of an explosion, becausein that case the mine throws forth fire, and fire enlightens."Police affairs!" cried the king, taking up Treville's words,"police affairs!  And what do you know about them, Monsieur?Meddle with your Musketeers, and do not annoy me in this way.  Itappears, according to your account, that if by mischance aMusketeer is arrested, France is in danger.  What a noise about aMusketeer!  I would arrest ten of them, VENTREBLEU, a hundred,even, all the company, and I would not allow a whisper.""From the moment they are suspected by your Majesty," saidTreville, "the Musketeers are guilty; therefore, you see meprepared to surrender my sword--for after having accused mysoldiers, there can be no doubt that Monsieur the Cardinal willend by accusing me.  It is best to constitute myself at once aprisoner with Athos, who is already arrested, and withD'Artagnan, who most probably will be."

    "Gascon-headed man, will you have done?" said the king."Sire," replied Treville, without lowering his voice in theleast, "either order my Musketeer to be restored to me, or lethim be tried."

    "He shall be tried," said the cardinal.

    "Well, so much the better; for in that case I shall demand of hisMajesty permission to plead for him."

    The king feared an outbreak.

    "If his Eminence," said he, "did not have personal motives--"The cardinal saw what the king was about to say and interruptedhim:

    "Pardon me," said he; "but the instant your Majesty considers mea prejudiced judge, I withdraw."

    "Come," said the king, "will you swear, by my father, that Athoswas at your residence during the event and that he took no partin it?"

    "By your glorious father, and by yourself, whom I love andvenerate above all the world, I swear it."

    "Be so kind as to reflect, sire," said the cardinal.  "If werelease the prisoner thus, we shall never know the truth.""Athos may always be found," replied Treville, "ready to answer,when it shall please the gownsmen to interrogate him.  He willnot desert, Monsieur the Cardinal, be assured of that; I willanswer for him."

    "No, he will not desert," said the king; "he can always be found,as Treville says.  Besides," added he, lowering his voice andlooking with a suppliant air at the cardinal, "let us give themapparent security; that is policy."

    This policy of Louis XIII made Richelieu smile.

    "Order it as you please, sire; you possess the right of pardon.""The right of pardoning only applies to the guilty," saidTreville, who was determined to have the last word, "and myMusketeer is innocent.  It is not mercy, then, that you are aboutto accord, sire, it is justice."

    "And he is in the Fort l'Eveque?" said the king.

    "Yes, sire, in solitary confinement, in a dungeon, like thelowest criminal."

    "The devil!" murmured the king; "what must be done?""Sign an order for his release, and all will be said," repliedthe cardinal.  "I believe with your Majesty that Monsieur deTreville's guarantee is more than sufficient."

    Treville bowed very respectfully, with a joy that was not unmixedwith fear; he would have preferred an obstinate resistance on thepart of the cardinal to this sudden yielding.

    The king signed the order for release, and Treville carried itaway without delay.  As he was about to leave the presence, thecardinal have him a friendly smile, and said, "A perfect harmonyreigns, sire, between the leaders and the soldiers of yourMusketeers, which must be profitable for the service andhonorable to all."

    "He will play me some dog's trick or other, and thatimmediately," said Treville.  "One has never the last word withsuch a man.  But let us be quick--the king may change his mind inan hour; and at all events it is more difficult to replace a manin the Fort l'Eveque or the Bastille who has got out, than tokeep a prisoner there who is in."

    M. de Treville made his entrance triumphantly into the Fortl'Eveque, whence he delivered the Musketeer, whose peacefulindifference had not for a moment abandoned him.

    The first time he saw D'Artagnan, "You have come off well," saidhe to him; "there is your Jussac thrust paid for.  There stillremains that of Bernajoux, but you must not be too confident."As to the rest, M. de Treville had good reason to mistrust thecardinal and to think that all was not over, for scarcely had thecaptain of the Musketeers closed the door after him, than hisEminence said to the king, "Now that we are at length byourselves, we will, if your Majesty pleases, converse seriously.Sire, Buckingham has been in Paris five days, and only left thismorning."

    16  IN WHICH M. SEGUIER, KEEPER OF THE SEALS, LOOKS MORE THANONCE FOR THE BELL, IN ORDER TO RING IT, AS HE DID BEFOREIt is impossible to form an idea of the impression these fewwords made upon Louis XIII.  He grew pale and red alternately;and the cardinal saw at once that he had recovered by a singleblow all the ground he had lost.

    "Buckingham in Paris!" cried he, "and why does he come?""To conspire, no doubt, with your enemies, the Huguenots and theSpaniards."

    "No, PARDIEU, no!  To conspire against my honor with Madame deChevreuse, Madame de Longueville, and the Condes.""Oh, sire, what an idea!  The queen is too virtuous; and besides,loves your Majesty too well."

    "Woman is weak, Monsieur Cardinal," said the king; "and as toloving me much, I have my own opinion as to that love.""I not the less maintain," said the cardinal, "that the Duke ofBuckingham came to Paris for a project wholly political.""And I am sure that he came for quite another purpose, MonsieurCardinal; but if the queen be guilty, let her tremble!""Indeed," said the cardinal, "whatever repugnance I may have todirecting my mind to such a treason, your Majesty compels me tothink of it.  Madame de Lannoy, whom, according to your Majesty'scommand, I have frequently interrogated, told me this morningthat the night before last her Majesty sat up very late, thatthis morning she wept much, and that she was writing all day.""That's it!" cried the king; "to him, no doubt.  Cardinal, I musthave the queen's papers."

    "But how to take them, sire?  It seems to me that it is neitheryour Majesty not myself who can charge himself with such amission."

    "How did they act with regard to the Marechale d'Ancre?" criedthe king, in the highest state of choler; "first her closets werethoroughly searched, and then she herself."

    "The Marechale d'Ancre was no more than the Marechale d'Ancre. AFlorentine adventurer, sire, and that was all; while the augustspouse of your Majesty is Anne of Austria, Queen of France--thatis to say, one of the greatest princesses in the world.""She is not the less guilty, Monsieur Duke!  The more she hasforgotten the high position in which she was placed, the moredegrading is her fall.  Besides, I long ago determined to put anend to all these petty intrigues of policy and love.  She hasnear her a certain Laporte."

    "Who, I believe, is the mainspring of all this, I confess," saidthe cardinal.

    "You think then, as I do, that she deceives me?" said the king."I believe, and I repeat it to your Majesty, that the queenconspires against the power of the king, but I have not saidagainst his honor."

    "And I--I tell you against both.  I tell you the queen does notlove me; I tell you she loves another; I tell you she loves thatinfamous Buckingham!  Why did you not have him arrested while inParis?"

    "Arrest the Duke!  Arrest the prime minister of King Charles I!Think of it, sire!  What a scandal!  And if the suspicions ofyour Majesty, which I still continue to doubt, should prove tohave any foundation, what a terrible disclosure, what a fearfulscandal!"

    "But as he exposed himself like a vagabond or a thief, he shouldhave been--"

    Louis XIII stopped, terrified at what he was about to say, whileRichelieu, stretching out his neck, waited uselessly for the wordwhich had died on the lips of the king.

    "He should have been--?"

    "Nothing," said the king, "nothing.  But all the time he was inParis, you, of course, did not lose sight of him?""No, sire."

    "Where did he lodge?"

    "Rue de la Harpe. No. 75."

    "Where is that?"

    "By the side of the Luxembourg."

    "And you are certain that the queen and he did not see eachother?"

    "I believe the queen to have too high a sense of her duty, sire.""But they have corresponded; it is to him that the queen has beenwriting all the day.  Monsieur Duke, I must have those letters!""Sire, notwithstanding--"

    "Monsieur Duke, at whatever price it may be, I will have them.""I would, however, beg your Majesty to observe--""Do you, then, also join in betraying me, Monsieur Cardinal, bythus always opposing my will?  Are you also in accord with Spainand England, with Madame de Chevreuse and the queen?""Sire," replied the cardinal, sighing, "I believed myself securefrom such a suspicion."

    "Monsieur Cardinal, you have heard me; I will have thoseletters."

    "There is but one way."

    "What is that?"

    "That would be to charge Monsieur de Seguier, the keeper of theseals, with this mission.  The matter enters completely into theduties of the post."

    "Let him be sent for instantly."

    "He is most likely at my hotel.  I requested him to call, andwhen I came to the Louvre I left orders if he came, to desire himto wait."

    "Let him be sent for instantly."

    "Your Majesty's orders shall be executed; but--"

    "But what?"

    "But the queen will perhaps refuse to obey."

    "My orders?"

    "Yes, if she is ignorant that these orders come from the king.""Well, that she may have no doubt on that head, I will go andinform her myself."

    "Your Majesty will not forget that I have done everything in mypower to prevent a rupture."

    "Yes, Duke, yes, I know you are very indulgent toward the queen,too indulgent, perhaps; we shall have occasion, I warn you, atsome future period to speak of that."

    "Whenever it shall please your Majesty; but I shall be alwayshappy and proud, sire, to sacrifice myself to the harmony which Idesire to see reign between you and the Queen of France.""Very well, Cardinal, very well; but, meantime, send for Monsieurthe Keeper of the Seals.  I will go to the queen."And Louis XIII, opening the door of communication, passed intothe corridor which led from his apartments to those of Anne ofAustria.

    The queen was in the midst of her women--Mme. de Guitaut, Mme. deSable, Mme. de Montbazon, and Mme. de Guemene.  In a corner wasthe Spanish companion, Donna Estafania, who had followed her fromMadrid.  Mme. Guemene was reading aloud, and everybody waslistening to her with attention with the exception of the queen,who had, on the contrary, desired this reading in order that shemight be able, while feigning to listen, to pursue the thread ofher own thoughts.

    These thoughts, gilded as they were by a last reflection of love,were not the less sad.  Anne of Austria, deprived of theconfidence of her husband, pursued by the hatred of the cardinal,who could not pardon her for having repulsed a more tenderfeeling, having before her eyes the example of the queen-motherwhom that hatred had tormented all her life--though Marie deMedicis, if the memoirs of the time are to be believed, had begunby according to the cardinal that sentiment which Anne of Austriaalways refused him--Anne of Austria had seen her most devotedservants fall around her, her most intimate confidants, herdearest favorites.  Like those unfortunate persons endowed with afatal gift, she brought misfortune upon everything she touched.Her friendship was a fatal sign which called down persecution.Mme. de Chevreuse and Mme. de Bernet were exiled, and Laporte didnot conceal from his mistress that he expected to be arrestedevery instant.

    It was at the moment when she was plunged in the deepest anddarkest of these reflections that the door of the chamber opened,and the king entered.

    The reader hushed herself instantly.  All the ladies rose, andthere was a profound silence.  As to the king, he made nodemonstration of politeness, only stopping before the queen."Madame," said he, "you are about to receive a visit from thechancellor, who will communicate certain matters to you withwhich I have charged him."

    The unfortunate queen, who was constantly threatened withdivorce, exile, and trial even, turned pale under her rouge, andcould not refrain from saying, "But why this visit, sire?  Whatcan the chancellor have to say to me that your Majesty could notsay yourself?"

    The king turned upon his heel without reply, and almost at thesame instant the captain of the Guards, M. de Guitant, announcedthe visit of the chancellor.

    When the chancellor appeared, the king had already gone out byanother door.

    The chancellor entered, half smiling, half blushing.  As we shallprobably meet with him again in the course of our history, it maybe well for our readers to be made at once acquainted with him.This chancellor was a pleasant man.  He was Des Roches le Masle,canon of Notre Dame, who had formerly been valet of a bishop, whointroduced him to his Eminence as a perfectly devout man.  Thecardinal trusted him, and therein found his advantage.There are many stories related of him, and among them this.After a wild youth, he had retired into a convent, there toexpiate, at least for some time, the follies of adolescence.  Onentering this holy place, the poor penitent was unable to shutthe door so close as to prevent the passions he fled fromentering with him.  He was incessantly attacked by them, and thesuperior, to whom he had confided this misfortune, wishing asmuch as in him lay to free him from them, had advised him, inorder to conjure away the tempting demon, to have recourse to thebell rope, and ring with all his might.  At the denunciatingsound, the monks would be rendered aware that temptation wasbesieging a brother, and all the community would go to prayers.This advice appeared good to the future chancellor.  He conjuredthe evil spirit with abundance of prayers offered up by themonks.  But the devil does not suffer himself to be easilydispossessed from a place in which he has fixed his garrison.  Inproportion as they redoubled the exorcisms he redoubled thetemptations; so that day and night the bell was ringing fullswing, announcing the extreme desire for mortification which thepenitent experienced.

    The monks had no longer an instant of repose.  By day they didnothing but ascend and descend the steps which led to the chapel;at night, in addition to complines and matins, they were furtherobliged to leap twenty times out of their beds and prostratethemselves on the floor of their cells.

    It is not known whether it was the devil who gave way, or themonks who grew tired; but within three months the penitentreappeared in the world with the reputation of being the mostterrible POSSESSED that ever existed.

    On leaving the convent he entered into the magistracy, becamepresident on the place of his uncle, embraced the cardinal'sparty, which did not prove want of sagacity, became chancellor,served his Eminence with zeal in his hatred against the queen-mother and his vengeance against Anne of Austria, stimulated thejudges in the affair of Calais, encouraged the attempts of M. deLaffemas, chief gamekeeper of France; then, at length, investedwith the entire confidence of the cardinal--a confidence which hehad so well earned-he received the singular commission for theexecution of which he presented himself in the queen'sapartments.

    The queen was still standing when he entered; but scarcely hadshe perceived him then she reseated herself in her armchair, andmade a sign to her women to resume their cushions and stools, andwith an air of supreme hauteur, said, "What do you desire,monsieur, and with what object do you present yourself here?""To make, madame, in the name of the king, and without prejudiceto the respect which I have the honor to owe to your Majesty aclose examination into all your papers."

    "How, monsieur, an investigation of my papers--mine!  Truly, thisis an indignity!"

    "Be kind enough to pardon me, madame; but in this circumstance Iam but the instrument which the king employs.  Has not hisMajesty just left you, and has he not himself asked you toprepare for this visit?"

    "Search, then, monsieur!  I am a criminal, as it appears.Estafania, give up the keys of my drawers and my desks."For form's sake the chancellor paid a visit to the pieces offurniture named; but he well knew that it was not in a piece offurniture that the queen would place the important letter she hadwritten that day.

    When the chancellor had opened and shut twenty times the drawersof the secretaries, it became necessary, whatever hesitation hemight experience--it became necessary, I say, to come to theconclusion of the affair; that is to say, to search the queenherself.  The chancellor advanced, therefore, toward Anne ofAustria, and said with a very perplexed and embarrassed air, "Andnow it remains for me to make the principal examination.""What is that?" asked the queen, who did not understand, orrather was not willing to understand.

    "His majesty is certain that a letter has been written by youduring the day; he knows that it has not yet been sent to itsaddress.  This letter is not in your table nor in your secretary;and yet this letter must be somewhere."

    "Would you dare to lift your hand to your queen?" said Anne ofAustria, drawing herself up to her full height, and fixing hereyes upon the chancellor with an expression almost threatening."I am a faithful subject of the king, madame, and all that hisMajesty commands I shall do."

    "Well, it is true!" said Anne of Austria; "and the spies of thecardinal have served him faithfully.  I have written a lettertoday; that letter is not yet gone.  The letter is here."  Andthe queen laid her beautiful hand on her bosom.

    "Then give me that letter, madame," said the chancellor."I will give it to none but the king monsieur," said Anne."If the king had desired that the letter should be given to him,madame, he would have demanded it of you himself.  But I repeatto you, I am charged with reclaiming it; and if you do not giveit up--"

    "Well?"

    "He has, then, charged me to take it from you."

    "How!  What do you say?"

    "That my orders go far, madame; and that I am authorized to seekfor the suspected paper, even on the person of your Majesty.""What horror!" cried the queen.

    "Be kind enough, then, madame, to act more compliantly.""The conduct is infamously violent!  Do you know that, monsieur?""The king commands it, madame; excuse me."

    "I will not suffer it!  No, no, I would rather die!" cried thequeen, in whom the imperious blood of Spain and Austria began torise.

    The chancellor made a profound reverence.  Then, with theintention quite patent of not drawing back a foot from theaccomplishment of the commission with which he was charged, andas the attendant of an executioner might have done in the chamberof torture, he approached Anne of Austria, for whose eyes at thesame instant sprang tears of rage.

    The queen was, as we have said, of great beauty.  The commissionmight well be called delicate; and the king had reached, in hisjealousy of Buckingham, the point of not being jealous of anyoneelse.

    Without doubt the chancellor, Seguier looked about at that momentfor the rope of the famous bell; but not finding it he summonedhis resolution, and stretched forth his hands toward the placewhere the queen had acknowledged the paper was to be found.Anne of Austria took one step backward, became so pale that itmight be said she was dying, and leaning with her left hand upona table behind her to keep herself from falling, she with herright hand drew the paper from her bosom and held it out to thekeeper of the seals.

    "There, monsieur, there is that letter!" cried the queen, with abroken and trembling voice; "take it, and deliver me from yourodious presence."

    The chancellor, who, on his part, trembled with an emotion easilyto be conceived, took the letter, bowed to the ground, andretired.  The door was scarcely closed upon him, when the queensank, half fainting, into the arms of her women.

    The chancellor carried the letter to the king without having reada single word of it.  The king took it with a trembling hand,looked for the address, which was wanting, became very pale,opened it slowly, then seeing by the first words that it wasaddressed to the King of Spain, he read it rapidly.It was nothing but a plan of attack against the cardinal.  Thequeen pressed her brother and the Emperor of Austria to appear tobe wounded, as they really were, by the policy of Richelieu--theeternal object of which was the abasement of the house ofAustria--to declare war against France, and as a condition ofpeace, to insist upon the dismissal of the cardinal; but as tolove, there was not a single word about it in all the letter.The king, quite delighted, inquired if the cardinal was still atthe Louvre; he was told that his Eminence awaited the orders ofhis Majesty in the business cabinet.

    The king went straight to him.

    "There, Duke," said he, "you were right and I was wrong.  Thewhole intrigue is political, and there is not the least questionof love in this letter; but, on the other hand, there is abundantquestion of you."

    The cardinal took the letter, and read it  with the greatestattention; then, when he had arrived at the end of it, he read ita second time.  "Well, your Majesty," said he, "you see how farmy enemies go; they menace you with two wars if you do notdismiss me.  In your place, in truth, sire, I should yield tosuch powerful instance; and on my part, it would be a realhappiness to withdraw from public affairs."

    "What say you, Duke?"

    "I say, sire, that my health is sinking under these excessivestruggles and these never-ending labors.  I say that according toall probability I shall not be able to undergo the fatigues ofthe siege of La Rochelle, and that it would be far better thatyou should appoint there either Monsieur de Conde, Monsieur deBassopierre, or some valiant gentleman whose business is war, andnot me, who am a churchman, and who am constantly turned asidefor my real vocation to look after matters for which I have noaptitude.  You would be the happier for it at home, sire, and Ido not doubt you would be the greater for it abroad.""Monsieur Duke," said the king, "I understand you.  Be satisfied,all who are named in that letter shall be punished as theydeserve, even the queen herself."

    "What do you say, sire?  God forbid that the queen should sufferthe least inconvenience or uneasiness on my account!  She hasalways believed me, sire, to be her enemy; although your Majestycan bear witness that I have always taken her part warmly, evenagainst you.  Oh, if she betrayed your Majesty on the side ofyour honor, it would be quite another thing, and I should be thefirst to say, 'No grace, sire--no grace for the guilty!'Happily, there is nothing of the kind, and your Majesty has justacquired a new proof of it."

    "That is true, Monsieur Cardinal," said the king, "and you wereright, as you always are; but the queen, not the less, deservesall my anger."

    "It is you, sire, who have now incurred hers.  And even if shewere to be seriously offended, I could well understand it; yourMajesty has treated her with a severity--"

    "It is thus I will always treat my enemies and yours, Duke,however high they may be placed, and whatever peril I may incurin acting severely toward them."

    "The queen is my enemy, but is not yours, sire; on the contrary,she is a devoted, submissive, and irreproachable wife.  Allow me,then, sire, to intercede for her with your Majesty.""Let her humble herself, then, and come to me first.""On the contrary, sire, set the example.  You have committed thefirst wrong, since it was you who suspected the queen.""What!  I make the first advances?" said the king.  "Never!""Sire, I entreat you to do so."

    "Besides, in what manner can I make advances first?""By doing a thing which you know will be agreeable to her.""What is that?"

    "Give a ball; you know how much the queen loves dancing.  I willanswer for it, her resentment will not hold out against such anattention."

    "Monsieur Cardinal, you know that I do not like worldlypleasures."

    "The queen will only be the more grateful to you, as she knowsyour antipathy for that amusement; besides, it will be anopportunity for her to wear those beautiful diamonds which yougave her recently on her birthday and with which she has sincehad no occasion to adorn herself."

    "We shall see, Monsieur Cardinal, we shall see," said the king,who, in his joy at finding the queen guilty of a crime which hecared little about, and innocent of a fault of which he had greatdread, was ready to make up all differences with her, "we shallsee, but upon my honor, you are too indulgent toward her.""Sire," said the cardinal, "leave severity to your ministers.Clemency is a royal virtue; employ it, and you will find that youderive advantage therein."

    Thereupon the cardinal, hearing the clock strike eleven, bowedlow, asking permission of the king to retire, and supplicatinghim to come to a good understanding with the queen.Anne of Austria, who, in consequence of the seizure of herletter, expected reproaches, was much astonished the next day tosee the king make some attempts at reconciliation with her.  Herfirst movement was repellent.  Her womanly pride and her queenlydignity had both been so cruelly offended that she could not comeround at the first advance; but, overpersuaded by the advice ofher women, she at last had the appearance of beginning to forget.The king took advantage of this favorable moment to tell her thather had the intention of shortly giving a fete.

    A fete was so rare a thing for poor Anne of Austria that at thisannouncement, as the cardinal had predicted, the last trace ofher resentment disappeared, if not from her heart at least fromher countenance.  She asked upon what day this fete would takeplace, but the king replied that he must consult the cardinalupon that head.

    Indeed, every day the king asked the cardinal when this feteshould take place; and every day the cardinal, under somepretext, deferred fixing it.  Ten days passed away thus.On the eighth day after the scene we have described, the cardinalreceived a letter with the London stamp which only containedthese lines:  "I have them; but I am unable to leave London forwant of money.  Send me five hundred pistoles, and four or fivedays after I have received them I shall be in Paris."On the same day the cardinal received this letter the king puthis customary question to him.

    Richelieu counted on his fingers, and said to himself, "She willarrive, she says, four or five days after having received themoney.  It will require four or five days for the transmission ofthe money, four or five days for her to return; that makes tendays.  Now, allowing for contrary winds, accidents, and a woman'sweakness, there are twelve days."

    "Well, Monsieur Duke," said the king, "have you made yourcalculations?"

    "Yes, sire.  Today is the twentieth of September.  The aldermenof the city give a fete on the third of October.  That will fallin wonderfully well; you will not appear to have gone out of yourway to please the queen."

    Then the cardinal added, "A PROPOS, sire, do not forget to tellher Majesty the evening before the fete that you should like tosee how her diamond studs become her."

    17  BONACIEUX AT HOME

    It was the second time the cardinal had mentioned these diamondstuds to the king.  Louis XIII was struck with this insistence,and began to fancy that this recommendation concealed somemystery.

    More than once the king had been humiliated by the cardinal,whose police, without having yet attained the perfection of themodern police, were excellent, being better informed thanhimself, even upon what was going on in his own household.  Hehoped, then, in a conversation with Anne of Austria, to obtainsome information from that conversation, and afterward to comeupon his Eminence with some secret which the cardinal either knewor did not know, but which, in either case, would raise himinfinitely in the eyes of his minister.

    He went then to the queen, and according  to custom accosted herwith fresh menaces against those who surrounded her.  Anne ofAustria lowered her head, allowed the torrent to flow on withoutreplying, hoping that it would cease of itself; but this was notwhat Louis XIII meant.  Louis XIII wanted a discussion from whichsome light or other might break, convinced as he was that thecardinal had some afterthought and was preparing for him one ofthose terrible surprises which his Eminence was so skillful ingetting up.  He arrived at this end by his persistence inaccusation.

    "But," cried Anne of Austria, tired of these vague attacks, "but,sire, you do not tell me all that you have in your heart.  Whathave I done, then?  Let me know what crime I have committed.  Itis impossible that your Majesty can make all this ado about aletter written to my brother."

    The king, attacked in a manner so direct, did not know what toanswer; and he thought that this was the moment for expressingthe desire which he was not have made until the evening beforethe fete.

    "Madame," said he, with dignity, "there will shortly be a ball atthe Hotel de Ville.  I wish, in order to honor our worthyaldermen, you should appear in ceremonial costume, and above all,ornamented with the diamond studs which I gave you on yourbirthday.  That is my answer."

    The answer was terrible.  Anne of Austria believed that LouisXIII knew all, and that the cardinal had persuaded him to employthis long dissimulation of seven or eight days, which, likewise,was characteristic.  She became excessively pale, leaned herbeautiful hand upon a CONSOLE, which hand appeared then like oneof wax, and looking at the king with terror in her eyes, she wasunable to reply by a single syllable.

    "You hear, madame," said the king, who enjoyed the embarrassmentto its full extent, but without guessing the cause.  "You hear,madame?"

    "Yes, sire, I hear," stammered the queen.

    "You will appear at this ball?"

    "Yes."

    "With those studs?"

    "Yes."

    The queen's paleness, if possible, increased; the king perceivedit, and enjoyed it with that cold cruelty which was one of theworst sides of his character.

    "Then that is agreed," said the king, "and that is all I had tosay to you."

    "But on what day will this ball take place?" asked Anne ofAustria.

    Louis XIII felt instinctively that he ought not to reply to thisquestion, the queen having put it in an almost dying voice."Oh, very shortly, madame," said he; "but I do not preciselyrecollect the date of the day.  I will ask the cardinal.""It was the cardinal, then, who informed you of this fete?""Yes, madame," replied the astonished king; "but why do you askthat?"

    "It was he who told you to invite me to appear with these studs?""That is to say, madame--"

    "It was he, sire, it was he!"

    "Well, and what does it signify whether it was he or I?  Is thereany crime in this request?"

    "No, sire."

    "Then you will appear?"

    "Yes, sire."

    "That is well," said the king, retiring, "that is well; I countupon it."

    The queen made a curtsy, less from etiquette than because herknees were sinking under her.  The king went away enchanted."I am lost," murmured the queen, "lost!--for the cardinal knowsall, and it is he who urges on the king, who as yet knows nothingbut will soon know everything.  I am lost!  My God, my God, myGod!"

    She knelt upon a cushion and prayed, with her head buried betweenher palpitating arms.

    In fact, her position was terrible.  Buckingham had returned toLondon; Mme. Chevreuse was at Tours.  More closely watched thanever, the queen felt certain, without knowing how to tell which,that one of her women had betrayed her.  Laporte could not leavethe Louvre; she had not a soul in the world in whom she couldconfide.  Thus, while contemplating the misfortune whichthreatened her and the abandonment in which she was left, shebroke out into sobs and tears.

    "Can I be of service to your Majesty?" said all at once a voicefull of sweetness and pity.

    The queen turned sharply round, for there could be no deceptionin the expression of that voice; it was a friend who spoke thus.In fact, at one of the doors which opened into the queen'sapartment appeared the pretty Mme. Bonacieux.  She had beenengaged in arranging the dresses and linen in a closet when theking entered; she could not get out and had heard all.The queen uttered a piercing cry at finding herself surprised--for in her trouble she did not at first recognize the young womanwho had been given to her by Laporte.

    "Oh, fear nothing, madame!" said the young woman, clasping herhands and weeping herself at the queen's sorrows; "I am yourMajesty's, body and soul, and however far I may be from you,however inferior may be my position, I believe I have discovereda means of extricating your Majesty from your trouble.""You, oh, heaven, you!" cried the queen; "but look me in theface.  I am betrayed on all sides.  Can I trust in you?""Oh, madame!" cried the young woman, falling on her knees; "uponmy soul, I am ready to die for your Majesty!"

    This expression sprang from the very bottom of the heart, and,like the first, there was no mistaking it.

    "Yes," continued Mme. Bonacieux, "yes, there are traitors here;but by the holy name of the Virgin, I swear that no one is moredevoted to your Majesty than I am.  Those studs which the kingspeaks of, you gave them to the Duke of Buckingham, did you not?Those studs were enclosed in a little rosewood box which he heldunder his arm?  Am I deceived?  Is it not so, madame?""Oh, my God, my God!" murmured the queen, whose teeth chatteredwith fright.

    "Well, those studs," continued Mme. Bonacieux, "we must have themback again."

    "Yes, without doubt, it is necessary," cried the queen; "but howam I to act?  How can it be effected?"

    "Someone must be sent to the duke."

    "But who, who?  In whom can I trust?"

    "Place confidence in me, madame; do me that honor, my queen, andI will find a messenger."

    "But I must write."

    "Oh, yes; that is indispensable.  Two words from the hand of yourMajesty and your private seal."

    "But these two words would bring about my condemnation, divorce,exile!"

    "Yes, if they fell into infamous hands.  But I will answer forthese two words being delivered to their address.""Oh, my God!  I must then place my life, my honor, my reputation,in your hands?"

    "Yes, yes, madame, you must; and I will save them all.""But how?  Tell me at least the means."

    "My husband had been at liberty these two or three days.  I havenot yet had time to see him again.  He is a worthy, honest manwho entertains neither love nor hatred for anybody.  He will doanything I wish.  He will set out upon receiving an order fromme, without knowing what he carries, and he will carry yourMajesty's letter, without even knowing it is from your Majesty,to the address which is on it."

    The queen took the two hands of the young woman with a burst ofemotion, gazed at her as if to read her very heart, and seeingnothing but sincerity in her beautiful eyes, embraced hertenderly.

    "Do that," cried she, "and you will have saved my life, you willhave saved my honor!"

    "Do not exaggerate the service I have the happiness to renderyour Majesty.  I have nothing to save for your Majesty; you areonly the victim of perfidious plots."

    "That is true, that is true, my child," said the queen, "you areright."

    "Give me then, that letter, madame; time presses."The queen ran to a little table, on which were ink, paper, andpens.  She wrote two lines, sealed the letter with her privateseal, and gave it to Mme. Bonacieux.

    "And now," said the queen, "we are forgetting one very necessarything."

    "What is that, madame?"

    "Money."

    Mme. Bonacieux blushed.

    "Yes, that is true," said she, "and I will confess to yourMajesty that my husband--"

    "Your husband has none.  Is that what you would say?""He has some, but he is very avaricious; that is his fault.Nevertheless, let not your Majesty be uneasy, we will findmeans."

    "And I have none, either," said the queen.  Those who have readthe MEMOIRS of Mme. de Motteville will not be astonished at thisreply.  "But wait a minute."

    Anne of Austria ran to her jewel case.

    "Here," said she, "here is a ring of great value, as I have beenassured.  It came from my brother, the King of Spain.  It ismine, and I am at liberty to dispose of it.  Take this ring;raise money with it, and let your husband set out.""In an hour you shall be obeyed."

    "You see the address," said the queen, speaking so low that Mme.Bonacieux could hardly hear what she said, "To my Lord Duke ofBuckingham, London."

    "The letter shall be given to himself."

    "Generous girl!" cried Anne of Austria.

    Mme. Bonacieux kissed the hands of the queen, concealed the paperin the bosom of her dress, and disappeared with the lightness ofa bird.

    Ten minutes afterward she was at home.  As she told the queen,she had not seen her husband since his liberation; she wasignorant of the change that had taken place in him with respectto the cardinal--a change which had since been strengthened bytwo or three visits from the Comte de Rochefort, who had becomethe best friend of Bonacieux, and had persuaded him, without muchtrouble, order in his house, the furniture of which he had foundmostly broken and his closets nearly empty--justice not being oneof the three things which King Solomon names as leaving no tracesof their passage.  As to the servant, she had run away at themoment of her master's arrest.  Terror had had such an effectupon the poor girl that she had never ceased walking from Paristill she reached Burgundy, her native place.

    The worthy mercer had, immediately upon re-entering his house,informed his wife of his happy return, and his wife had repliedby congratulating him, and telling him that the first moment shecould steal from her duties should be devoted to paying him avisit.

    This first moment had been delayed five days, which, under anyother circumstances, might have appeared rather long to M.Bonacieux; but he had, in the visit he had made to the cardinaland in the visits Rochefort had made him, ample subjects forreflection, and as everybody knows, nothing makes time pass morequickly than reflection.

    This was the more so because Bonacieux's reflections were allrose-colored.  Rochefort called him his friend, his dearBonacieux, and never ceased telling him that the cardinal had agreat respect for him.  The mercer fancied himself already on thehigh road to honors and fortune.

    On her side Mme. Bonacieux had also reflected; but, it must beadmitted, upon something widely different from ambition.  Inspite of herself her thoughts constantly reverted to thathandsome young man who was so brave and appeared to be so much inlove.  Married at eighteen to Mme. Bonacieux, having always livedamong her husband's friends--people little capable of inspiringany sentiment whatever in a young woman whose heart was above herposition--Mme. Bonacieux had remained insensible to vulgarseductions; but at this period the title of gentleman had greatinfluence with the citizen class, and D'Artagnan was a gentleman.Besides, he wore the uniform of the Guards, which next to that ofthe Musketeers was most admired by the ladies.  He was, werepeat, handsome, young, and bold; he spoke of love like a manwho did love and was anxious to be loved in return.  There wascertainly enough in all this to turn a head only twenty-threeyears old, and Mme. Bonacieux had just attained that happy periodof life.

    The couple, then, although they had not seen each other for eightdays, and during that time serious events had taken place inwhich both were concerned, accosted each other with a degree ofpreoccupation.  Nevertheless, Bonacieux manifested real joy, andadvanced toward his wife with open arms.  Madame Bonacieuxpresented her cheek to him.

    "Let us talk a little," said she.

    "How!" said Bonacieux, astonished.

    "Yes, I have something of the highest importance to tell you.""True," said he, "and I have some questions sufficiently seriousto put to you.  Describe to me your abduction, I pray you.""Oh, that's of no consequence just now," said Mme. Bonacieux."And what does it concern, then--my captivity?"

    "I heard of it the day it happened; but as you were not guilty ofany crime, as you were not guilty of any intrigue, as you, inshort, knew nothing that could compromise yourself or anybodyelse, I attached no more importance to that event than itmerited."

    "You speak very much at your ease, madame," said Bonacieux, hurtat the little interest his wife showed in him.  "Do you know thatI was plunged during a day and night in a dungeon of theBastille?"

    "Oh, a day and night soon pass away.  Let us return to the objectthat brings me here."

    "What, that which brings you home to me?  Is it not the desire ofseeing a husband again from whom you have been separated for aweek?" asked the mercer, piqued to the quick.

    "Yes, that first, and other things afterward."

    "Speak."

    "It is a thing of the highest interest, and upon which our futurefortune perhaps depends."

    "The complexion of our fortune has changed very much since I sawyou, Madam Bonacieux, and I should not be astonished if in thecourse of a few months it were to excite the envy of many folks.""Yes, particularly if you follow the instructions I am about togive you."

    "Me?"

    "Yes, you.  There is good and holy action to be performed,monsieur, and much money to be gained at the same time."Mme. Bonacieux knew that in talking of money to her husband, shetook him on his weak side.  But a man, were he even a mercer,when he had talked for ten minutes with Cardinal Richelieu, is nolonger the same man.

    "Much money to be gained?" said Bonacieux, protruding his lip."Yes, much."

    "About how much?"

    "A thousand pistoles, perhaps."

    "What you demand of me is serious, then?"

    "It is indeed."

    "What must be done?"

    "You must go away immediately.  I will give you a paper which youmust not part with on any account, and which you will deliverinto the proper hands."

    "And whither am I to go?"

    "To London."

    "I go to London?  Go to!  You jest!  I have no business inLondon."

    "But others wish that you should go there."

    "But who are those others?  I warn you that I will never againwork in the dark, and that I will know not only to what I exposemyself, but for whom I expose myself."

    "An illustrious persons sends you; an illustrious person awaitsyou.  The recompense will exceed your expectations; that is all Ipromise you."

    "More intrigues!  Nothing but intrigues!  Thank you, madame, I amaware of them now; Monsieur Cardinal has enlightened me on thathead."

    "The cardinal?" cried Mme. Bonacieux.  "Have you seen thecardinal?"

    "He sent for me," answered the mercer, proudly.

    "And you responded to his bidding, you imprudent man?""Well, I can't say I had much choice of going or not going, for Iwas taken to him between two guards.  It is true also, that as Idid not then know his Eminence, if I had been able to dispensewith the visit, I should have been enchanted."

    "He ill-treated you, then; he threatened you?"

    "He gave me his hand, and called me his friend.  His friend!  Doyou hear that, madame?  I am the friend of the great cardinal!""Of the great cardinal!"

    "Perhaps you would contest his right to that title, madame?""I would contest nothing; but I tell you that the favor of aminister is ephemeral, and that a man must be mad to attachhimself to a minister.  There are powers above his which do notdepend upon a man or the issue of an event; it is to these powerswe should rally."

    "I am sorry for it, madame, but I acknowledge not her power butthat of the great man whom I have the honor to serve.""You serve the cardinal?"

    "Yes, madame; and as his servant, I will not allow you to beconcerned in plots against the safety of the state, or to servethe intrigues of a woman who in not French and who has a Spanishheart.  Fortunately we have the great cardinal; his vigilant eyewatches over and penetrates to the bottom of the heart."Bonacieux was repeating, word for word, a sentence which he hadheard from the Comte de Rochefort; but the poor wife, who hadreckoned on her husband, and who, in that hope, had answered forhim to the queen, did not tremble the less, both at the dangerinto which she had nearly cast herself and at the helpless stateto which she was reduced.  Nevertheless, knowing the weakness ofher husband, and more particularly his cupidity, she did notdespair of bringing him round to her purpose.

    "Ah, you are a cardinalist, then, monsieur, are you?" cried she;"and you serve the party of those who maltreat your wife andinsult your queen?"

    "Private interests are as nothing before the interests of all.  Iam for those who save the state," said Bonacieux, emphatically."And what do you know about the state you talk of?" said Mme.Bonacieux, shrugging her shoulders.  "Be satisfied with being aplain, straightforward citizen, and turn to that side whichoffers the most advantages."

    "Eh, eh!" said Bonacieux, slapping a plump, round bag, whichreturned a sound a money; "what do you think of this, MadamePreacher?"

    "Whence comes that money?"

    "You do not guess?"

    "From the cardinal?"

    "From him, and from my friend the Comte de Rochefort.""The Comte de Rochefort!  Why it was he who carried me off!""That may be, madame!"

    "And you receive silver from that man?"

    "Have you not said that that abduction was entirely political?""Yes; but that abduction had for its object the betrayal of mymistress, to draw from me by torture confessions that mightcompromise the honor, and perhaps the life, of my augustmistress."

    "Madame," replied Bonacieux, "your august mistress is aperfidious Spaniard, and what the cardinal does is well done.""Monsieur," said the young woman, "I know you to be cowardly,avaricious, and foolish, but I never till now believed youinfamous!"

    "Madame," said Bonacieux, who had never seen his wife in apassion, and who recoiled before this conjugal anger, "madame,what do you say?"

    "I say you are a miserable creature!" continued Mme. Bonacieux,who saw she was regaining some little influence over her husband."You meddle with politics, do you--and still more, withcardinalist politics?  Why, you sell yourself, body and soul, tothe demon, the devil, for money!"

    "No, to the cardinal."

    "It's the same thing," cried the young woman.  "Who callsRichelieu calls Satan."

    "Hold your tongue, hold your tongue, madame!  You may beoverheard."

    "Yes, you are right; I should be ashamed for anyone to know yourbaseness."

    "But what do you require of me, then?  Let us see.""I have told you.  You must depart instantly, monsieur.  You mustaccomplish loyally the commission with which I deign to chargeyou, and on that condition I pardon everything, I forgeteverything; and what is more," and she geld out her hand to him,"I restore my love."

    Bonacieux was cowardly and avaricious, but he loved his wife.  Hewas softened.  A man of fifty cannot long bear malice with a wifeof twenty-three.  Mme. Bonacieux saw that he hesitated."Come!  Have you decided?" said she.

    "But, my dear love, reflect a little upon what you require of me.London is far from Paris, very far, and perhaps the commissionwith which you charge me is not without dangers?""What matters it, if you avoid them?"

    "Hold, Madame Bonacieux," said the mercer, "hold!  I positivelyrefuse; intrigues terrify me.  I have seen the Bastille.  My!Whew!  That's a frightful place, that Bastille!  Only to think ofit makes my flesh crawl.  They threatened me with torture.  Doyou know what torture is?  Wooden points that they stick inbetween your legs till your bones stick out!  No, positively Iwill not go.  And, MORBLEU, why do you not go yourself?  For intruth, I think I have hitherto been deceived in you.  I reallybelieve you are a man, and a violent one, too."

    "And you, you are a woman--a miserable woman, stupid and brutal.You are afraid, are you?  Well, if you do not go this veryinstant, I will have you arrested by the queen's orders, and Iwill have you placed in the Bastille which you dread so much."Bonacieux fell into a profound reflection.  He weighed the twoangers in his brain--that of the cardinal and that of the queen;that of the cardinal predominated enormously.

    "Have me arrested on the part of the queen," said he, "and I--Iwill appeal to his Eminence.

    At once Mme. Bonacieux saw that she had gone too far, and she wasterrified at having communicated so much.  She for a momentcontemplated with fright that stupid countenance, impressed withthe invincible resolution of a fool that is overcome by fear."Well, be it so!" said she.  "Perhaps, when all is considered,you are right.  In the long run, a man knows more about politicsthan a woman, particularly such as, like you, Monsieur Bonacieux,have conversed with the cardinal.  And yet it is very hard,"added she, "that a man upon whose affection I thought I mightdepend, treats me thus unkindly and will not comply with any ofmy fancies."

    "That is because your fancies go too far," replied the triumphantBonacieux, "and I mistrust them."

    'Well, I will give it up, then," said the young woman, sighing."It is well as it is; say no more about it."

    "At least you should tell me what I should have to do in London,"replied Bonacieux, who remembered a little too late thatRochefort had desired him to endeavor to obtain his wife'ssecrets.

    "It is of no use for you to know anything about it," said theyoung woman, whom an instinctive mistrust now impelled to drawback.  "It was about one of those purchases that interest women--a purchase by which much might have been gained."But the more the young woman excused herself, the more importantBonacieux thought the secret which she declined to confide tohim.  He resolved then to hasten immediately to the residence ofthe Comte de Rochefort, and tell him that the queen was seekingfor a messenger to send to London.

    "Pardon me for quitting you, my dear Madame Bonacieux," said he;"but, not knowing you would come to see me, I had made anengagement with a friend.  I shall soon return; and if you willwait only a few minutes for me, as soon as I have concluded mybusiness with that friend, as it is growing late, I will comeback and reconduct you to the Louvre."

    "Thank you, monsieur, you are not brave enough to be of any useto me whatever," replied Mme. Bonacieux.  "I shall return verysafely to the Louvre all alone."

    "As you please, Madame Bonacieux," said the ex-mercer.  "Shall Isee you again soon?"

    "Next week I hope my duties will afford me a little liberty, andI will take advantage of it to come and put things in order here,so they must necessarily be much deranged."

    "Very well; I shall expect you.  You are not angry with me?""Not the least in the world."

    "Tell then, then?"

    "Till then."

    Bonacieux kissed his wife's hand, and set off at a quick pace."Well," said Mme. Bonacieux, when her husband had shut the streetdoor and she found herself alone; "that imbecile lacked but onething to become a cardinalist.  And I, who have answered for himto the queen--I, who have promised my poor mistress--ah, my God,my God!  She will take me for one of those wretches with whom thepalace swarms and who are placed about her as spies!  Ah,Monsieur Bonacieux, I never did love you much, but now it isworse than ever.  I hate you, and on my word you shall pay forthis!"

    At the moment she spoke these words a rap on the ceiling made herraise her head, and a voice which reached her through the ceilingcried, "Dear Madame Bonacieux, open for me the little door on thealley, and I will come down to you."

    18  LOVER AND HUSBAND

    "Ah, Madame," said D'Artagnan, entering by the door which theyoung woman opened for him, "allow me to tell you that you have abad sort of a husband."

    "You have, then, overheard our conversation?" asked Mme.Bonacieux, eagerly, and looking at D'Artagnan with disquiet."The whole?"

    "But how, my God?"

    "By a mode of proceeding known to myself, and by which I likewiseoverheard the more animated conversation which had with thecardinal's police."

    "And what did you understand by what we said?"

    "A thousand things.  In the first place, that, unfortunately,your husband is a simpleton and a fool; in the next place, youare in trouble, of which I am very glad, as it gives me aopportunity of placing myself at your service, and God knows I amready to throw myself into the fire for you; finally, that thequeen wants a brave, intelligent, devoted man to make a journeyto London for her.  I have at least two of the three qualitiesyou stand in need of, and here I am.

    Mme. Bonacieux made no reply; but her heart beat with joy andsecret hope shone in her eyes.

    "And what guarantee will you give me," asked she, "if I consentto confide this message to you?"

    "My love for you.  Speak!  Command!  What is to be done?""My God, my God!" murmured the young woman, "ought I to confidesuch a secret to you, monsieur?  You are almost a boy.""I see that you require someone to answer for me?""I admit that would reassure me greatly."

    "Do you know Athos?"

    "No."

    "Porthos?"

    "No."

    "Aramis?"

    "No.  Who are these gentleman?"

    "Three of the king's Musketeers.  Do you know Monsieur deTreville, their captain?"

    "Oh, yes, him!  I know him; not personally, but from having heardthe queen speak of him more than once as a brave and loyalgentleman."

    "You do not fear lest he should betray you to the cardinal?""Oh, no, certainly not!"

    "Well, reveal your secret to him, and ask him whether, howeverimportant, however valuable, however terrible it may be, you maynot confide it to me."

    "But this secret is not mine, and I cannot reveal it in thismanner."

    "You were about to confide it to Monsieur Bonacieux," saidD'Artagnan, with chagrin.

    "As one confides a letter to the hollow of a tree, to the wing ofa pigeon, to the collar of a dog."

    "And yet, me--you see plainly that I love you."

    "You say so."

    "I am an honorable man."

    "You say so."

    "I am a gallant fellow."

    "I believe it."

    "I am brave."

    "Oh, I am sure of that!"

    "Then, put me to the proof."

    Mme. Bonacieux looked at the young man, restrained for a minuteby a last hesitation; but there was such an ardor in his eyes,such persuasion in his voice, that she felt herself constrainedto confide in him.  Besides, she found herself in circumstanceswhere everything must be risked for the sake of everything.  Thequeen might be as much injured by too much reticence as by toomuch confidence; and--let us admit it--the involuntary sentimentwhich she felt for her young protector decided her to speak."Listen," said she; "I yield to your protestations, I yield toyour assurances.  But I swear to you, before God who hears us,that if you betray me, and my enemies pardon me, I will killmyself, while accusing you of my death."

    "And I--I swear to you before God, madame," said D'Artagnan."that if I am taken while accomplishing the orders you give me, Iwill die sooner than do anything that may compromise anyone."Then the young woman confided in him the terrible secret of whichchance had already communicated to him a part in front of theSamaritaine.  This was their mutual declaration of love.D'Artagnan was radiant with joy and pride.  This secret which hepossessed, this woman whom he loved!  Confidence and love mad hima giant.

    "I go," said he; "I go at once."

    "How, you will go!" said Mme. Bonacieux; "and your regiment, yourcaptain?"

    "By my soul, you had made me forget all that, dear Constance!Yes, you are right; a furlough is needful."

    "Still another obstacle," murmured Mme. Bonacieux, sorrowfully."As to that," cried D'Artagnan, after a moment of reflection, "Ishall surmount it, be assured."

    "How so?"

    "I will go this very evening to Treville, whom I will request toask this favor for me of his brother-in-law, MonsieurDessessart."

    "But another thing."

    "What?" asked D'Artagnan, seeing that Mme. Bonacieux hesitated tocontinue.

    "You have, perhaps, no money?"

    "PERHAPS is too much," said D'Artagnan, smiling.

    "Then," replied Mme. Bonacieux, opening a cupboard and takingfrom it the very bag which a half hour before her husband hadcaressed so affectionately, "take this bag."

    "The cardinal's?" cried D'Artagnan, breaking into a loud laugh,he having heard, as may be remembered, thanks to the brokenboards, every syllable of the conversation between the mercer andhis wife.

    "The cardinal's," replied Mme. Bonacieux.  "You see it makes avery respectable appearance."

    "PARDIEU," cried D'Artagnan, "it will be a double amusing affairto save the queen with the cardinal's money!"

    "You are an amiable and charming young man," said Mme. Bonacieux."Be assured you will not find her Majesty ungrateful.""Oh, I am already grandly recompensed!" cried D'Artagnan.  "Ilove you; you permit me to tell you that I do--that is alreadymore happiness than I dared to hope."

    "Silence!" said Mme. Bonacieux, starting.

    "What!"

    "Someone is talking in the street."

    "It is the voice of--"

    "Of my husband!  Yes, I recognize it!"

    D'Artagnan ran to the door and pushed the bolt.

    "He shall not come in before I am gone," said he; "and when I amgone, you can open to him."

    "But I ought to be gone, too.  And the disappearance of hismoney; how am I to justify it if I am here?"

    "You are right; we must go out."

    "Go out?  How?  He will see us if we go out."

    "Then you must come up into my room."

    "Ah," said Mme. Bonacieux, "you speak that in a tone thatfrightens me!"

    Mme. Bonacieux pronounced these words with tears in her eyes.D'Artagnan saw those tears, and much disturbed, softened, hethrew himself at her feet.

    "With me you will be as safe as in a temple; I give you my wordof a gentleman."

    "Let us go," said she, "I place full confidence in you, myfriend!"

    D'Artagnan drew back the bolt with precaution, and both, light asshadows, glided through the interior door into the passage,ascended the stairs as quietly as possible, and enteredD'Artagnan's chambers.

    Once there, for greater security, the young man barricaded thedoor.  They both approached the window, and through a slit in theshutter they saw Bonacieux talking with a man in a cloak.At sight of this man, D'Artagnan started, and half drawing hissword, sprang toward the door.

    It was the man of Meung.

    "What are you going to do?" cried Mme. Bonacieux; "you will ruinus all!"

    "But I have sworn to kill that man!" said D'Artagnan."Your life is devoted from this moment, and does not belong toyou.  In the name of the queen I forbid you to throw yourselfinto any peril which is foreign o that of your journey.""And do you command nothing in your own name?"

    "In my name," said Mme. Bonacieux, with great emotion, "in myname I beg you!  But listen; they appear to be speaking of me."D'Artagnan drew near the window, and lent his ear.M. Bonacieux had opened his door, and seeing the apartment, hadreturned to the man in the cloak, whom he had left alone for aninstant.

    "She is gone," said he; "she must have returned to the Louvre.""You are sure," replied the stranger, "that she did not suspectthe intentions with which you went out?"

    "No," replied Bonacieux, with a self-sufficient air, "she is toosuperficial a woman."

    "Is the young Guardsman at home?"

    "I do not think he is; as you see, his shutter is closed, and youcan see no light shine through the chinks of the shutters.""All the same, it is well to be certain."

    "How so?"

    "By knocking at his door.  Go."

    "I will ask his servant."

    Bonacieux re-entered the house, passed through the same door thathad afforded a passage for the two fugitives, went up toD'Artagnan's door, and knocked.

    No one answered.  Porthos, in order to make a greater display,had that evening borrowed Planchet.  As to D'Artagnan, he tookcare not to give the least sign of existence.

    The moment the hand of Bonacieux sounded on the door, the twoyoung people felt their hearts bound within them."There is nobody within," said Bonacieux.

    "Never mind.  Let us return to your apartment.  We shall be saferthere than in the doorway."

    "Ah, my God!" whispered Mme. Bonacieux, "we shall hear no more.""On the contrary," said D'Artagnan, "we shall hear better."D'Artagnan raised the three or four boards which made his chamberanother ear of Dionysius, spread a carpet on the floor, went uponhis knees, and made a sign to Mme. Bonacieux to stoop as he didtoward the opening.

    "You are sure there is nobody there?" said the stranger."I will answer for it," said Bonacieux.

    "And you think that your wife--"

    "Has returned to the Louvre."

    "Without speaking to anyone but yourself?"

    "I am sure of it."

    "That is an important point, do you understand?"

    "Then the news I brought you is of value?"

    "The greatest, my dear Bonacieux; I don't conceal this from you.""Then the cardinal will be pleased with me?"

    "I have no doubt of it."

    "The great cardinal!"

    "Are you sure, in her conversation with you, that your wifementioned no names?"

    "I think not."

    "She did not name Madame de Chevreuse, the Duke of Buckingham, orMadame de Vernet?"

    "No; she only told me she wished to send me to London to servethe interests of an illustrious personage."

    "The traitor!" murmured Mme. Bonacieux.

    "Silence!" said D'Artagnan, taking her hand, which, withoutthinking of it, she abandoned to him.

    "Never mind," continued the man in the cloak; "you were a foolnot to have pretended to accept the mission.  You would then bein present possession of the letter.  The state, which is nowthreatened, would be safe, and you--"

    "And I?"

    "Well you--the cardinal would have given you letters ofnobility."

    "Did he tell you so?"

    "Yes, I know that he meant to afford you that agreeablesurprise."

    "Be satisfied," replied Bonacieux; "my wife adores me, and thereis yet time."

    "The ninny!" murmured Mme. Bonacieux.

    "Silence!" said D'Artagnan, pressing her hand more closely."How is there still time?" asked the man in the cloak."I go to the Louvre; I ask for Mme. Bonacieux; I say that I havereflected; I renew the affair; I obtain the letter, and I rundirectly to the cardinal."

    "Well, go quickly!  I will return soon to learn the result ofyour trip."

    The stranger went out.

    "Infamous!" said Mme. Bonacieux, addressing this epithet to herhusband.

    "Silence!" said D'Artagnan, pressing her hand still more warmly.A terrible howling interrupted these reflections of D'Artagnanand Mme. Bonacieux.  It was her husband, who had discovered thedisappearance of the moneybag, and was crying "Thieves!""Oh, my God!" cried Mme. Bonacieux, "he will rouse the wholequarter."

    Bonacieux called a long time; but as such cries, on account oftheir frequency, brought nobody in the Rue des Fossoyeurs, and aslately the mercer's house had a bad name, finding that nobodycame, he went out continuing to call, his voice being heardfainter and fainter as he went in the direction of the Rue duBac.

    "Now he is gone, it is your turn to get out," said Mme.Bonacieux.  "Courage, my friend, but above all, prudence, andthink what you owe to the queen."

    "To her and to you!" cried D'Artagnan.  "Be satisfied, beautifulConstance.  I shall become worthy of her gratitude; but shall Ilikewise return worthy of your love?"

    The young woman only replied by the beautiful glow which mountedto her cheeks.  A few seconds afterward D'Artagnan also went outenveloped in a large cloak, which ill-concealed the sheath of along sword.

    Mme. Bonacieux followed him with her eyes, with that long, fondlook with which he had turned the angle of the street, she fellon her knees, and clasping her hands, "Oh, my God," cried she,"protect the queen, protect me!"

    19  PLAN OF CAMPAIGN

    D'Artagnan went straight to M. de Treville's.  He had reflectedthat in a few minutes the cardinal would be warned by this cursedstranger, who appeared to be his agent, and he judged, withreason, he had not a moment to lose.

    The heart of the young man overflowed with joy.  An opportunitypresented itself to him in which there would be at the same timeglory to be acquired, and money to be gained; and as a far higherencouragement, it brought him into close intimacy with a woman headored.  This chance did, then, for him at once more than hewould have dared to ask of Providence.

    M. de Treville was in his saloon with his habitual court ofgentlemen.  D'Artagnan, who was known as a familiar of the house,went straight to his office, and sent word that he wished to seehim on something of importance.

    D'Artagnan had been there scarcely five minutes when M. deTreville entered.  At the first glance, and by the joy which waspainted on his countenance, the worthy captain plainly perceivedthat something new was on foot.

    All the way along D'Artagnan had been consulting with himselfwhether he should place confidence in M. de Treville, or whetherhe should only ask him to give him CARTE BLANCHE for some secretaffair.  But M. de Treville had always been so thoroughly hisfriend, had always been so devoted to the king and queen, andhated the cardinal so cordially, that the young man resolved totell him everything.

    "Did you ask for me, my good friend?" said M. de Treville.'Yes, monsieur," said D'Artagnan, lowering his voice, "than thehonor, perhaps the life of the queen."

    "What did you say?" asked M. de Treville, glancing round to seeif they were surely alone, and then fixing his questioning lookupon D'Artagnan.

    "I say, monsieur, that chance has rendered me master of asecret--"

    "Which you will guard, I hope, young man, as your life.""But which I must impart to you, monsieur, for you alone canassist me in the mission I have just received from her Majesty.""Is this secret your own?"

    "No, monsieur; it is her Majesty's."

    "Are you authorized by her Majesty to communicate it to me?""No, monsieur, for, on the contrary, I am desired to preserve theprofoundest mystery."

    "Why, then, are you about to betray it to me?"

    "Because, as I said, without you I can do nothing; and I amafraid you will refuse me the favor I come to ask if you do notknow to what end I ask it."

    "Keep your secret, young man, and tell me what you wish.""I wish you to obtain for me, from Monsieur Dessessart, leave ofabsence for fifteen days."

    "When?"

    "This very night."

    "You leave Paris?"

    "I am going on a mission."

    "May you tell me whither?"

    "To London."

    "Has anyone an interest in preventing your arrival there?""The cardinal, I believe, would give the world to prevent mysuccess."

    "And you are going alone?"

    "I am going alone."

    "In that case you will not get beyond Bondy.  I tell you so, bythe faith of De Treville."

    "How so?"

    "You will be assassinated."

    "And I shall die in the performance of my duty."

    "But your mission will not be accomplished."

    "That is true," replied D'Artagnan.

    "Believe me," continued Treville, "in enterprises of this kind,in order that one may arrive, four must set out.""Ah, you are right, monsieur," said D'Artagnan; "but you knowAthos, Porthos, and Aramis, and you know if I can dispose ofthem."

    "Without confiding to them the secret which I am not willing toknow?"

    "We are sworn, once for all, to implicit confidence anddevotedness against all proof.  Besides, you can tell them thatyou have full confidence in me, and they will not be moreincredulous than you."

    "I can send to each of them leave of absence for fifteen days,that is all--to Athos, whose wound still makes him suffer, to goto the waters of Forges; to Porthos and Aramis to accompany theirfriend, whom they are not willing to abandon in such a painfulcondition.  Sending their leave of absence will be proof enoughthat I authorize their journey."

    "Thanks, monsieur.  You are a hundred times too good.""Begone, then, find them instantly, and let all be done tonight!Ha!  But first write your request to Dessessart.  Perhaps you hada spy at your heels; and your visit, if it should ever be knownto the cardinal, will thus seem legitimate."

    D'Artagnan drew up his request, and M. de Treville, on receivingit, assured him that by two o'clock in the morning the fourleaves of absence should be at the respective domiciles of thetravelers.

    "Have the goodness to send mine to Athos's residence.  I shoulddread some disagreeable encounter if I were to go home.""Be easy.  Adieu, and a prosperous voyage.  A PROPOS," said M. deTreville, calling him back.

    D'Artagnan returned.

    "Have you any money?"

    D'Artagnan tapped the bag he had in his pocket.

    "Enough?" asked M. de Treville.

    "Three hundred pistoles."

    "Oh, plenty!  That would carry you to the end of the world.Begone, then!"

    D'Artagnan saluted M. de Treville, who held out his hand to him;D'Artagnan pressed it with a respect mixed with gratitude.  Sincehis first arrival at Paris, he had had constant occasion to honorthis excellent man, whom he had always found worthy, loyal, andgreat.

    His first visit was to Aramis, at whose residence he ha not beensince the famous evening on which he had followed Mme. Bonacieux.Still further, he had seldom seen the young Musketeer; but everytime he had seen him, he had remarked a deep sadness imprinted onhis countenance.

    This evening, especially, Aramis was melancholy and thoughtful.D'Artagnan asked some questions about this prolonged melancholy.Aramis pleaded as his excuse a commentary upon the eighteenthchapter of St. Augustine, which he was forced to write in Latinfor the following week, and which preoccupied him a good deal.After the two friends had been chatting a few moments, a servantfrom M. de Treville entered, bringing a sealed packet."What is that?" asked Aramis.

    "The leave of absence Monsieur has asked for," replied thelackey.

    "For me!  I have asked for no leave of absence."

    "Hold your tongue and take it!" said D'Artagnan.  "And you, myfriend, there is a demipistole for your trouble; you will tellMonsieur de Treville that Monsieur Aramis is very much obliged tohim.  Go."

    The lackey bowed to the ground and departed.

    "What does all this mean?" asked Aramis.

    "Pack up all you want for a journey of a fortnight, and followme."

    "But I cannot leave Paris just now without knowing--"Aramis stopped.

    "What is become of her?  I suppose you mean--" continuedD'Artagnan.

    "Become of whom?" replied Aramis.

    "The woman who was here--the woman with the embroideredhandkerchief."

    "Who told you there was a woman here?" replied Aramis, becomingas pale as death.

    "I saw her."

    "And you know who she is?"

    "I believe I can guess, at least."

    "Listen!" said Aramis.  "Since you appear to know so many things,can you tell me what is become of that woman?"

    "I presume that she has returned to Tours."

    "To Tours?  Yes, that may be.  You evidently know her.  But whydid she return to Tours without telling me anything?""Because she was in fear of being arrested."

    "Why has she not written to me, then?"

    "Because she was afraid of compromising you."

    "D'Artagnan, you restore me to life!" cried Aramis.  "I fanciedmyself despised, betrayed.  I was so delighted to see her again!I could not have believed she would risk her liberty for me, andyet for what other cause could she have returned to Paris?""for the cause which today takes us to England."

    "And what is this cause?" demanded Aramis.

    "Oh, you'll know it someday, Aramis; but at present I mustimitate the discretion of 'the doctor's niece.'"

    Aramis smiled, as he remembered the tale he had told his friendson a certain evening.  "Well, then, since she has left Paris, andyou are sure of it, D'Artagnan, nothing prevents me, and I amready to follow you.  You say we are going--"

    "To see Athos now, and if you will come thither, I beg you tomake haste, for we have lost much time already.  A PROPOS, informBazin."

    "Will Bazin go with us?" asked Aramis.

    "Perhaps so.  At all events, it is best that he should follow usto Athos's."

    Aramis called Bazin, and, after having ordered him to join themat Athos's residence, said "Let us go then," at the same timetaking his cloak, sword, and three pistols, opening uselessly twoor three drawers to see if he could not find stray coin.  Whenwell assured this search was superfluous, he followed D'Artagnan,wondering to himself how this young Guardsman should know so wellwho the lady was to whom he had given hospitality, and that heshould know better than himself what had become of her.Only as they went out Aramis placed his hand upon the arm ofD'Artagnan, and looking at him earnestly, "You have not spoken ofthis lady?" said he.

    "To nobody in the world."

    "Not even to Athos or Porthos?"

    "I have not breathed a syllable to them."

    "Good enough!"

    Tranquil on this important point, Aramis continued his way withD'Artagnan, and both soon arrived at Athos's dwelling.  Theyfound him holding his leave of absence in one hand, and M. deTreville's note in the other.

    "Can you explain to me what signify this leave of absence andthis letter, which I have just received?" said the astonishedAthos.

    My dear Athos, I wish, as your health absolutely requires it,that you should rest for a fortnight.  Go, then, and take thewaters of Forges, or any that may be more agreeable to you, andrecuperate yourself as quickly as possible.

    Yours affectionate

    De Treville

    "Well, this leave of absence and that letter mean that you mustfollow me, Athos."

    "To the waters of Forges?"

    "There or elsewhere."

    "In the king's service?"

    "Either the king's or the queen's.  Are we not their Majesties'servants?"

    At that moment Porthos entered.  "PARDIEU!" said he, "here is astrange thing!  Since when, I wonder, in the Musketeers, did theygrant men leave of absence without their asking for it?""Since," said D'Artagnan, "they have friends who ask it forthem."

    "Ah, ah!" said Porthos, "it appears there's something freshhere."

    "Yes, we are going--" said Aramis.

    "To what country?" demanded Porthos.

    "My faith!  I don't much about it," said Athos.  "AskD'Artagnan."

    "To London, gentlemen," said D'Artagnan.

    "To London!" cried Porthos; "and what the devil are we going todo in London?"

    "That is what I am not at liberty  to tell you, gentlemen; youmust trust to me."

    "But in order to go to London," added Porthos, "money is needed,and I have none."

    "Nor I," said Aramis.

    "Nor I," said Athos.

    "I have," replied D'Artagnan, pulling out his treasure from hispocket, and placing it on the table.  "There are in this bagthree hundred pistoles.  Let each take seventy-five; that isenough to take us to London and back.  Besides, make yourselveseasy; we shall not all arrive at London."

    "Why so?"

    "Because, in all probability, some one of us will be left on theroad."

    "Is this, then, a campaign upon which we are now entering?""One of a most dangerous kind, I give you notice.""Ah!  But if we do risk being killed," said Porthos, "at least Ishould like to know what for."

    "You would be all the wiser," said Athos.

    "And yet," said Aramis, "I am somewhat of Porthos's opinion.""Is the king accustomed to give you such reasons?  No.  He saysto you jauntily, 'Gentlemen, there is fighting going on inGascony or in Flanders; go and fight,' and you go there.  Why?You need give yourselves no more uneasiness about this.""D'Artagnan is right," said Athos; "here are our three leaves ofabsence which came from Monsieur de Treville, and here are threehundred pistoles which came from I don't know where.  So let usgo and get killed where we are told to go.  Is life worth thetrouble of so many questions?  D'Artagnan, I am ready to followyou."

    "And I also," said Porthos.

    "And I also," said Aramis.  "And, indeed, I am not sorry to quitParis; I had need of distraction."

    "Well, you will have distractions enough, gentlemen, be assured,"said D'Artagnan.

    "And, now, when are we to go?" asked Athos.

    "Immediately," replied D'Artagnan; "we have not a minute tolose."

    "Hello, Grimaud!  Planchet!  Mousqueton!  Bazin!" cried the fouryoung men, calling their lackeys, "clean my boots, and fetch thehorses from the hotel."

    Each Musketeer was accustomed to leave at the general hotel, asat a barrack, his own horse and that of his lackey.  Planchet,Grimaud, Mousqueton, and Bazin set off at full speed."Now let us lay down the plan of campaign," said Porthos.  "Wheredo we go first?"

    "To Calais," said D'Artagnan; "that is the most direct line toLondon."

    "Well," said Porthos, "this is my advice--"

    "Speak!"

    "Four men traveling together would be suspected.  D'Artagnan willgive each of us his instructions.  I will go by the way ofBoulogne to clear the way; Athos will set out two hours after, bythat of Amiens; Aramis will follow us by that of Noyon; as toD'Artagnan, he will go by what route he thinks is best, inPlanchet's clothes, while Planchet will follow us likeD'Artagnan, in the uniform of the Guards."

    "Gentlemen," said Athos, "my opinion is that it is not proper toallow lackeys to have anything to do in such an affair.  A secretmay, by chance, be betrayed by gentlemen;  but it is almostalways sold by lackeys."

    "Porthos's plan appears to me to be impracticable," saidD'Artagnan, "inasmuch as I am myself ignorant of whatinstructions I can give you.  I am the bearer of a letter, thatis all,  I have not, and I cannot make three copies of thatletter, because it is sealed.  We must, then, as it appears tome, travel in company.  This letter is here, in this pocket," andhe pointed to the pocket which contained the letter.  "If Ishould be killed, one of you must take it, and continue theroute; if he be killed, it will be another's turn, and so on--provided a single one arrives, that is all that is required.""Bravo, D'Artagnan, your opinion is mine," cried Athos, "Besides,we must be consistent; I am going to take the waters, you willaccompany me.  Instead of taking the waters of Forges, I go andtake sea waters; I am free to do so.  If anyone wishes to stopus, I will show Monsieur de Treville's letter, and you will showyour leaves of absence.  If we are attacked, we will defendourselves; if we are tried, we will stoutly maintain that we wereonly anxious to dip ourselves a certain number of times in thesea.  They would have an easy bargain of four isolated men;whereas four men together make a troop.  We will arm our fourlackeys with pistols and musketoons; if they send an army outagainst us, we will give battle, and the survivor, as D'Artagnansays, will carry the letter."

    "Well said," cried Aramis; "you don't often speak, Athos, butwhen you do speak, it is like St. John of the Golden Mouth.  Iagree to Athos's plan.  And you, Porthos?"

    "I agree to it, too," said Porthos, "if D'Artagnan approves ofit.  D'Artagnan, being the bearer of the letter, is naturally thehead of the enterprise; let him decide, and we will execute.""Well," said D'Artagnan, "I decide that we should adopt Athos'splan, and that we set off in half an hour."

    "Agreed!" shouted the three Musketeers in chorus.Each one, stretching out his hand to the bag, took his seventy-five pistoles, and make his preparations to set out at the timeappointed.

    20  THE JOURNEY

    At two o'clock in the morning, our four adventurers left Paris bythe Barriere St. Denis.  As long as it was dark they remainedsilent; in spite of themselves they submitted to the influence ofthe obscurity, and apprehended ambushes on every side.With the first rays of day their tongues were loosened; with thesun gaiety revived.  It was like the eve of a battle; the heartbeat, the eyes laughed, and they felt that the life they wereperhaps going to lose, was, after all, a good thing.Besides, the appearance of the caravan was formidable.  The blackhorses of the Musketeers, their martial carriage, with theregimental step of these noble companions of the soldier, wouldhave betrayed the most strict incognito.  The lackeys followed,armed to the teeth.

    All went well till they arrived at Chantilly, which they reachedabout eight o'clock in the morning.  They needed breakfast, andalighted at the door of an AUBERGE, recommended by a signrepresenting St. Martin giving half his cloak to a poor man.They ordered the lackeys not to unsaddle the gorses, and to holdthemselves in readiness to set off again immediately.They entered the common hall, and placed themselves at table.  Agentleman, who had just arrived by the route of Dammartin, wasseated at the same table, and was breakfasting.  He opened theconversation about rain and fine weather; the travelers replied.He drank to their good health, and the travelers returned hispoliteness.

    But at the moment Mousqueton came to announce that the horseswere ready, and they were arising from table, the strangerproposed to Porthos to drink the health of the cardinal.  Porthosreplied that he asked no better if the stranger, in his turn,would drink the health of the king.  The stranger cried that heacknowledged no other king but his Eminence.  Porthos called himdrunk, and the stranger drew his sword.

    "You have committed a piece of folly," said Athos, "but it can'tbe helped; there is no drawing back.  Kill the fellow, and rejoinus as soon as you can."

    All three remounted their horses, and set out at a good pave,while Porthos was promising his adversary to perforate him withall the thrusts known in the fencing schools.

    "There goes one!" cried Athos, at the end of five hundred paces."But why did that man attack Porthos rather than any other one ofus?" asked Aramis.

    "Because, as Porthos was talking louder than the rest of us, hetook him for the chief," said D'Artagnan.

    "I always said that this cadet from Gascony was a well ofwisdom," murmured Athos; and the travelers continued their route.At Beauvais they stopped two hours, as well to breathe theirhorses a little as to wait for Porthos.  At the end of two hours,as Porthos did not come, not any news of him, they resumed theirjourney.

    At a league from Beauvais, where the road was confined betweentwo high banks, they fell in with eight or ten men who, takingadvantage of the road being unpaved in this spot, appeared to beemployed in digging holes and filling up the ruts with mud.Aramis, not liking to soil his boots with this artificial mortar,apostrophized them rather sharply.  Athos wished to restrain him,but it was too late.  The laborers began to jeer the travelersand by their insolence disturbed the equanimity even of the coolAthos, who urged on his horse against one of them.Then each of these men retreated as far as the ditch, from whicheach took a concealed musket; the result was that our seventravelers were outnumbered in weapons.  Aramis received a ballwhich passed through his shoulder, and Mousqueton another ballwhich lodged in the fleshy part which prolongs the lower portionof the loins.  Therefore Mousqueton alone fell from his horse,not because he was severely wounded, but not being able to seethe wound, he judged it to be more serious than it really was."It was an ambuscade!" shouted D'Artagnan.  "Don't waste acharge!  Forward!"

    Aramis, wounded as he was, seized the mane of his horse, whichcarried him on with the others.  Mousqueton's horse rejoinedthem, and galloped by the side of his companions."That will serve us for a relay," said Athos.

    "I would rather have had a hat," said D'Artagnan.  "Mine wascarried away by a ball.  By my faith, it is very fortunate thatthe letter was not in it."

    "They'll kill poor Porthos when he comes up," said Aramis."If Porthos were on his legs, he would have rejoined us by thistime," said Athos.  "My opinion is that on the ground the drunkenman was not intoxicated."

    They continued at their best speed for two hours, although thehorses were so fatigued that it was to be feared they would soonrefuse service.

    The travelers had chosen crossroads in the hope that they mightmeet with less interruption; but at Crevecoeur, Aramis declaredhe could proceed no farther.  In fact, it required all thecourage which he concealed beneath his elegant form and polishedmanners to bear him so far.  He grew more pale every minute, andthey were obliged to support him on his horse.  They lifted himoff at the door of a cabaret, left Bazin with him, who, besides,in a skirmish was more embarrassing than useful, and set forwardagain in the hope of sleeping at Amiens.

    "MORBLEU," said Athos, as soon as they were again in motion,"reduced to two masters and Grimaud and Planchet!  MORBLEU!  Iwon't be their dupe, I will answer for it.  I will neither openmy mouth nor draw my sword between this and Calais.  I swearby--"

    "Don't waste time in swearing," said D'Artagnan; "let us gallop,if our horses will consent."

    And the travelers buried their rowels in their horses' flanks,who thus vigorously stimulated recovered their energies.  Theyarrived at Amiens at midnight, and alighted at the AUBERGE of theGolden Lily.

    The host had the appearance of as honest a man as any on earth.He received the travelers with his candlestick in one hand andhis cotton nightcap in the other.  He wished to ledge the twotravelers each in a charming chamber; but unfortunately thesecharming chambers were at the opposite extremities of the hotel.D'Artagnan and Athos refused them.  The host replied that he hadno other worthy of their Excellencies; but the travelers declaredthey would sleep in the common chamber, each on a mattress whichmight be thrown upon the ground.  The host insisted; but thetravelers were firm, and he was obliged to do as they wished.They had just prepared their beds and barricaded their doorwithin, when someone knocked at the yard shutter; they demandedwho was there, and recognizing the voices of their lackeys,opened the shutter.  It was indeed Planchet and Grimaud."Grimaud can take care of the horses," said Planchet.  "If youare willing, gentlemen, I will sleep across your doorway, and youwill then be certain that nobody can reach you."

    "And on what will you sleep?" said D'Artagnan.

    "Here is my bed," replied Planchet, producing a bundle of straw."Come, then," said D'Artagnan, "you are right.  Mine host's facedoes not please me at all; it is to gracious."

    "Nor me either," said Athos.

    Planchet mounted by the window and installed himself across thedoorway, while Grimaud went and shut himself up in the stable,undertaking that by five o'clock in the morning he and the fourhorses should be ready.

    The night was quiet enough.  Toward two o'clock in the morningsomebody endeavored to open the door; but as Planchet awoke in aninstant and cried, "Who goes there?" somebody replied that he wasmistaken, and went away.

    At four o'clock in the morning they heard a terrible riot in thestables.  Grimaud had tried to waken the stable boys, and thestable boys had beaten him.  When they opened the window, theysaw the poor lad lying senseless, with his head split by a blowwith a pitchfork.

    Planchet went down into the yard, and wished to saddle thehorses; but the horses were all used up.  Mousqueton's horsewhich had traveled for five or six hours without a rider the daybefore, might have been able to pursue the journey; but by aninconceivable error the veterinary surgeon, who had been sentfor, as it appeared, to bleed one of the host's horses, had bledMousqueton's.

    This began to be annoying.  All these successive accidents wereperhaps the result of chance; but they might be the fruits of aplot.  Athos and D'Artagnan went out, while Planchet was sent toinquire if there were not three horses for sale in theneighborhood.  At the door stood two horses, fresh, strong, andfully equipped.  These would just have suited them.  He askedwhere their masters were, and was informed that they had passedthe night in the inn, and were then settling their bill with thehost.

    Athos went down to pay the reckoning, while D'Artagnan andPlanchet stood at the street door.  The host was in a lower andback room, to which Athos was requested to go.

    Athos entered without the least mistrust, and took out twopistoles to pay the bill.  The host was alone, seated before hisdesk, one of the drawers of which was partly open.  He took themoney which Athos offered to him, and after turning and turningit over and over in his hands, suddenly cried out that it wasbad, and that he would have him and his companions arrested asforgers.

    "You blackguard!" cried Athos, going toward him, "I'll cut yourears off!"

    At the same instant, four men, armed to the teeth, entered byside doors, and rushed upon Athos.

    "I am taken!" shouted Athos, with all the power of his lungs."Go on, D'Artagnan!  Spur, spur!" and he fired two pistols.D'Artagnan and Planchet did not require twice bidding; theyunfastened the two horses that were waiting at the door, leapedupon them, buried their spurs in their sides, and set off at fullgallop.

    "Do you know what has become of Athos?" asked D'Artagnan ofPlanchet, as they galloped on.

    "Ah, monsieur," said Planchet, "I saw one fall at each of his twoshots, and he appeared to me, through the glass door, to befighting with his sword with the others."

    "Brave Athos!" murmured D'Artagnan, "and to think that we arecompelled to leave him; maybe the same fate awaits us two paceshence.  Forward, Planchet, forward!  You are a brave fellow.""As I told you, monsieur," replied Planchet, "Picards are foundout by being used.  Besides, I am here in my own country, andthat excites me."

    And both, with free use of the spur, arrived at St. Omer withoutdrawing bit.  At St. Omer they breathed their horses with thebridles passed under their arms for fear of accident, and ate amorsel from their hands on the stones of the street, after theydeparted again.

    At a hundred paces from the gates of Calais, D'Artagnan's horsegave out, and could not by any means be made to get up again, theblood flowing from his eyes and his nose.  There still remainedPlanchet's horse; but he stopped short, and could not be made tomove a step.

    Fortunately, as we have said, they were within a hundred paces ofthe city; they left their two nags upon the high road, and rantoward the quay.  Planchet called his master's attention to agentleman who had just arrived with his lackey, and only precededthem by about fifty paces.  They made all speed to come up tothis gentleman, who appeared to be in great haste.  His bootswere covered with dust, and he inquired if he could not instantlycross over to England.

    "Nothing would be more easy," said the captain of a vessel readyto set sail, "but this morning came an order to let no one leavewithout express permission from the cardinal."

    "I have that permission," said the gentleman, drawing the paperfrom his pocket; "here it is."

    "Have it examined by the governor of the port," said theshipmaster, "and give me the preference."

    "Where shall I find the governor?"

    "At his country house."

    "And that is situated?"

    "At a quarter of a league from the city.  Look, you may see itfrom here--at the foot of that little hill, that slated roof.""Very well," said the gentleman. And, with his lackey, he tookthe road to the governor's country house.

    D'Artagnan and Planchet followed the gentleman at a distance offive hundred paces.  Once outside the city, D'Artagnan overtookthe gentleman as he was entering a little wood.

    "Monsieur," you appear to be in great haste?"

    "No one can be more so, monsieur."

    "I am sorry for that," said D'Artagnan; "for as I am in greathaste likewise, I wish to beg you to render me a service.""What?"

    "To let me sail first."

    "That's impossible," said the gentleman; "I have traveled sixtyleagues in forty hours, and by tomorrow at midday I must be inLondon."

    "I have performed that same distance in forty hours, and by teno'clock in the morning I must be in London."

    "Very sorry, monsieur; but I was here first, and will not sailsecond."

    "I am sorry, too, monsieur; but I arrived second, and must sailfirst."

    "The king's service!" said the gentleman.

    "My own service!" said D'Artagnan.

    "But this is a needless quarrel you seek with me, as it seems tome."

    "PARBLEU!  What do you desire it to be?"

    "What do you want?"

    "Would you like to know?"

    "Certainly."

    "Well, then, I wish that order of which you are bearer, seeingthat I have not one of my own and must have one.""You jest, I presume."

    "I never jest."

    "Let me pass!"

    "You shall not pass."

    "My brave young man, I will blow out your brains.  HOLA, Lubin,my pistols!"

    "Planchet," called out D'Artagnan, "take care of the lackey; Iwill manage the master."

    Planchet, emboldened by the first exploit, sprang upon Lubin; andbeing strong and vigorous, he soon got him on the broad of hisback, and placed his knee upon his breast.

    "Go on with your affair, monsieur," cried Planchet; "I havefinished mine."

    Seeing this, the gentleman drew his sword, and sprang uponD'Artagnan; but he had too strong an adversary.  In three secondsD'Artagnan had wounded him three times, exclaiming at eachthrust, "One for Athos, one for Porthos; and one for Aramis!"At the third hit the gentleman fell like a log.  D'Artagnanbelieved him to be dead, or at least insensible, and went towardhim for the purpose of taking the order; but the moment heextended his hand to search for it, the wounded man, who had notdropped his sword, plunged the point into D'Artagnan's breast,crying, "One for you!"

    "And one for me--the best for last!" cried D'Artagnan, furious,nailing him to the earth with a fourth thrust through his body.This time the gentleman closed his eyes and fainted.  D'Artagnansearched his pockets, and took from one of them the order for thepassage.  It was in the name of Comte de Wardes.

    Then, casting a glance on the handsome young man, who wasscarcely twenty-five years of age, and whom he was leaving in hisgore, deprived of sense and perhaps dead, he gave a sigh for thatunaccountable destiny which leads men to destroy each other forthe interests of people who are strangers to them and who oftendo not even know that they exist.  But he was soon aroused fromthese reflections by Lubin, who uttered loud cries and screamedfor help with all his might.

    Planchet grasped him by the throat, and pressed as hard as hecould.  "Monsieur," said he, "as long as I hold him in thismanner, he can't cry, I'll be bound; but as soon as I let go hewill howl again.  I know him for a Norman, and Normans areobstinate."

    In fact, tightly held as he was, Lubin endeavored still to cryout.

    "Stay!" said D'Artagnan; and taking out his handkerchief, hegagged him.

    "Now," said Planchet, "let us bind him to a tree."This being properly done, they drew the Comte de Wardes close tohis servant; and as night was approaching, and as the wounded manand the bound man were at some little distance within the wood,it was evident they were likely to remain there till the nextday.

    "And now," said D'Artagnan, "to the Governor's."

    "But you are wounded, it seems," said Planchet.

    "Oh, that's nothing!  Let us attend to what is more pressingfirst, and then we will attend to my wound; besides, it does notseem very dangerous."

    And they both set forward as fast as they could toward thecountry house of the worthy functionary.

    The Comte de Wardes was announced, and D'Artagnan was introduced."You have an order signed by the cardinal?" said the governor."Yes, monsieur," replied D'Artagnan; "here it is.""Ah, ah!  It is quite regular and explicit," said the governor."Most likely," said D'Artagnan; "I am one of his most faithfulservants."

    "It appears that his Eminence is anxious to prevent someone fromcrossing to England?"

    "Yes; a certain D'Artagnan, a Bearnese gentleman who left Parisin company with three of his friends, with the intention of goingto London."

    "Do you know him personally?" asked the governor."Whom?"

    "This D'Artagnan."

    "Perfectly well."

    "Describe him to me, then."

    "Nothing more easy."

    And D'Artagnan have, feature for feature, a description of theComte de Wardes.

    "Is he accompanied?"

    "Yes; by a lackey named Lubin."

    "We will keep a sharp lookout for them; and if we lay hands onthem his Eminence may be assured they will be reconducted toParis under a good escort."

    "And by doing so, Monsieur the Governor," said D'Artagnan, "youwill deserve well of the cardinal."

    "Shall you see him on your return, Monsieur Count?""Without a doubt."

    "Tell him, I beg you, that I am his humble servant.""I will not fail."

    Delighted with this assurance the governor countersigned thepassport and delivered it to D'Artagnan.  D'Artagnan lost no timein useless compliments.  He thanked the governor, bowed, anddeparted.  Once outside, he and Planchet set off as fast as theycould; and by making a long detour avoided the wood and reenteredthe city by another gate.

    The vessel was quite ready to sail, and the captain was waitingon the wharf.  "Well?" said he, on perceiving D'Artagnan."Here is my pass countersigned," said the latter."And that other gentleman?

    "He will not go today," said D'Artagnan; "but here, I'll pay youfor us two."

    "In that case let us go," said the shipmaster.

    "Let us go," repeated D'Artagnan.

    He leaped with Planchet into the boat, and five minutes afterthey were on board.  It was time; for they had scarcely sailedhalf a league, when D'Artagnan saw a flash and heard adetonation.  It was the cannon which announced the closing of theport.

    He had now leisure to look to his wound.  Fortunately, asD'Artagnan had thought, it was not dangerous.  The point of thesword had touched a rib, and glanced along the bone.  Stillfurther, his shirt had stuck to the wound, and he had lost only a few drops of blood.D'Artagnan was worn out with fatigue.  A mattress was laid uponthe deck for him.  He threw himself upon it, and fell asleep.On the morrow, at break of day, they were still three or fourleagues from the coast of England.  The breeze had been so lightall night, they had made but little progress.  At ten o'clock thevessel cast anchor in the harbor of Dover, and at half past tenD'Artagnan placed his foot on English land, crying, "Here I am atlast!"

    But that was not all; they must get to London.  In England thepost was well served.  D'Artagnan and Planchet took each a posthorse, and a postillion rode before them.  In a few hours theywere in the capital.

    D'Artagnan did not know London; he did not know a word ofEnglish; but he wrote the name of Buckingham on a piece of paper,and everyone pointed out to him the way to the duke's hotel.The duke was at Windsor hunting with the king.  D'Artagnaninquired for the confidential valet of the duke, who, havingaccompanied him in all his voyages, spoke French perfectly well;he told him that he came from Paris on an affair of life anddeath, and that he must speak with his master instantly.The confidence with which D'Artagnan spoke convinced Patrick,which was the name of this minister of the minister.  He orderedtwo horses to be saddled, and himself went as guide to the youngGuardsman.  As for Planchet, he had been lifted from his horse asstiff as a rush; the poor lad's strength was almost exhausted.D'Artagnan seemed iron.

    On their arrival at the castle they learned that Buckingham andthe king were hawking in the marshes two or three leagues away.In twenty minutes they were on the spot named.  Patrick sooncaught the sound of his master's voice calling his falcon."Whom must I announce to my Lord Duke?" asked Patrick."The young man who one evening sought a quarrel with him on thePont Neuf, opposite the Samaritaine."

    "A singular introduction!"

    "You will find that it is as good as another."

    Patrick galloped off, reached the duke, and announced to him inthe terms directed that a messenger awaited him.

    Buckingham at once remembered the circumstance, and suspectingthat something was going on in France of which it was necessaryhe should be informed, he only took the time to inquire where themessenger was, and recognizing from afar the uniform of theGuards, he put his horse into a gallop, and rode straight up toD'Artagnan.  Patrick discreetly kept in the background."No misfortune has happened to the queen?" cried Buckingham, theinstant he came up, throwing all his fear and love into thequestion.

    "I believe not; nevertheless I believe she runs some great perilfrom which your Grace alone can extricate her."

    "I!" cried Buckingham.  "What is it?  I should be too happy to beof any service to her.  Speak, speak!"

    "Take this letter," said D'Artagnan.

    "This letter!  From whom comes this letter?"

    "From her Majesty, as I think."

    "From her Majesty!" said Buckingham, becoming so pale thatD'Artagnan feared he would faint as he broke the seal."What is this rent?" said he, showing D'Artagnan a place where ithad been pierced through.

    "Ah," said D'Artagnan, "I did not see that; it was the sword ofthe Comte de Wardes which made that hole, when he gave me a goodthrust in the breast."

    "You are wounded?" asked Buckingham, as he opened the letter."Oh, nothing but a scratch," said D'Artagnan.

    "Just heaven, what have I read?" cried the duke.  "Patrick,remain here, or rather join the king, wherever he may be, andtell his Majesty that I humbly beg him to excuse me, but anaffair of the greatest importance recalls me to London.  Come,monsieur, come!" and both set off towards the capital at fullgallop.

    21  THE COUNTESS DE WINTER

    As they rode along, the duke endeavored to draw from D'Artagnan,not all that had happened, but what D'Artagnan himself knew.  Byadding all that he heard from the mouth of the young man to hisown remembrances, he was enabled to form a pretty exact idea of aposition of the seriousness of which, for the rest, the queen'sletter, short but explicit, gave him the clue.  But that whichastonished him most was that the cardinal, so deeply interestedin preventing this young man from setting his foot in England,had not succeeded in arresting him on the road.  It was then,upon the manifestation of this astonishment, that D'Artagnanrelated to him the precaution taken, and how, thanks to thedevotion of his three friends, whom he had left scattered andbleeding on the road, he had succeeded in coming off with asingle sword thrust, which had pierced the queen's letter and forwhich he had repaid M. de Wardes with such terrible coin.  Whilehe was listening to this recital, delivered with the greatestsimplicity, the duke looked from time to time at the young manwith astonishment, as if he could not comprehend how so muchprudence, courage, and devotedness could be allied with acountenance which indicated not more than twenty years.The horses went like the wind, and in a few minutes they were atthe gates of London.  D'Artagnan imagined that on arriving intown the duke would slacken his pace, but it was not so.  He kepton his way at the same rate, heedless about upsetting those whomhe met on the road.  In fact, in crossing the city two or threeaccidents of this kind happened; but Buckingham did not even turnhis head to see what became of those he had knocked down.D'Artagnan followed him amid cries which strongly resembledcurses.

    On entering the court of his hotel, Buckingham sprang from hishorse, and without thinking what became of the animal, threw thebridle on his neck, and sprang toward the vestibule.  D'Artagnandid the same, with a little more concern, however, for the noblecreatures, whose merits he fully appreciated; but he had thesatisfaction of seeing three or four grooms run from the kitchensand the stables, and busy themselves with the steeds.The duke walked so fast that D'Artagnan had some trouble inkeeping up with him.  He passed through several apartments, of anelegance of which even the greatest nobles of France had not evenan idea, and arrived at length in a bedchamber which was at oncea miracle of taste and of richness.  In the alcove of thischamber was a door concealed in the tapestry which the dukeopened with a little gold key which he wore suspended from hisneck by a chain of the same metal.  With discretion D'Artagnanremained behind; but at the moment when Buckingham crossed thethreshold, he turned round, and seeing the hesitation of theyoung man, "Come in!" cried he, "and if you have the good fortuneto be admitted to her Majesty's presence, tell her what you haveseen."

    Encouraged by this invitation, D'Artagnan followed the duke, whoclosed the door after them.  The two found themselves in a smallchapel covered with a tapestry of Persian silk worked with gold,and brilliantly lighted with a vast number of candles.  Over aspecies of altar, and beneath a canopy of blue velvet, surmountedby white and red plumes, was a full-length portrait of Anne ofAustria, so perfect in its resemblance that D'Artagnan uttered acry of surprise on beholding it.  One might believe the queen wasabout to speak.  On the altar, and beneath the portrait, was thecasket containing the diamond studs.

    The duke approached the altar, knelt as a priest might have donebefore a crucifix, and opened the casket.  "There, said he,drawing from the casket a large bow of blue ribbon all sparklingwith diamonds, "there are the precious studs which I have takenan oath should be buried with me.  The queen have them to me, thequeen requires them again.  Her will be done, like that of God,in all things."

    Then, he began to kiss, one after the other, those dear studswith which he was about to part.  All at once he uttered aterrible cry.

    "What is the matter?" exclaimed D'Artagnan, anxiously; "what hashappened to you, my Lord?"

    "All is lost!" cried Buckingham, becoming as pale as a corpse;"two of the studs are wanting, there are only ten.""Can you have lost them, my Lord, or do you think they have beenstolen?"

    "They have been stolen," replied the duke, "and it is thecardinal who has dealt this blow.  Hold; see!  The ribbons whichheld them have been cut with scissors."

    "If my Lord suspects they have been stolen, perhaps the personwho stole them still has them in his hands."

    "Wait, wait!" said the duke.  "The only time I have worn thesestuds was at a ball given by the king eight days ago at Windsor.The Comtesse de Winter, with whom I had quarreled, becamereconciled to me at that ball.  That reconciliation was nothingbut the vengeance of a jealous woman.  I have never seen her fromthat day.  The woman is an agent of the cardinal.""He has agents, then, throughout the world?" cried D'Artagnan."Oh, yes," said Buckingham, grating his teeth with rage.  "Yes,he is a terrible antagonist.  But when is this ball to takeplace?"

    "Monday next."

    "Monday next!  Still five days before us.  That's more time thanwe want.  Patrick!" cried the duke, opening the door of thechapel, "Patrick!"  His confidential valet appeared."My jeweler and my secretary."

    The valet went out with a mute promptitude which showed himaccustomed to obey blindly and without reply.

    But although the jeweler had been mentioned first, it was thesecretary who first made his appearance.  This was simply becausehe lived in the hotel.  He found Buckingham seated at a table inhis bedchamber, writing orders with his own hand."Mr. Jackson," said he, "go instantly to the Lord Chancellor, andtell him that I charge him with the execution of these orders.  Iwish them to be promulgated immediately."

    "But, my Lord, if the Lord Chancellor interrogates me upon themotives which may have led your Grace to adopt such anextraordinary measure, what shall I reply?"

    "That such is my pleasure, and that I answer for my will to noman."

    "Will that be the answer," replied the secretary, smiling, "whichhe must transmit to his Majesty if, by chance, his Majesty shouldhave the curiosity to know why no vessel is to leave any of theports of Great Britain?"

    "You are right, Mr. Jackson," replied Buckingham.  "He will say,in that case, to the king that I am determined on war, and thatthis measure is my first act of hostility against France."The secretary bowed and retired.

    "We are safe on that side," said Buckingham, turning towardD'Artagnan.  "If the studs are not yet gone to Paris, they willnot arrive till after you."

    "How so?"

    "I have just placed an embargo on all vessels at present in hisMajesty's ports, and without particular permission, not one darelife an anchor."

    D'Artagnan looked with stupefaction at a man who thus employedthe unlimited power with which he was clothed by the confidenceof a king in the prosecution of his intrigues.  Buckingham saw bythe expression of the young man's face what was passing in hismind, and he smiled.

    "Yes," said he, "yes, Anne of Austria is my true queen.  Upon aword from her, I would betray my country, I would betray my king,I would betray my God.  She asked me not to send the Protestantsof La Rochelle the assistance I promised them; I have not doneso.  I broke my word, it is true; but what signifies that?  Iobeyed my love; and have I not been richly paid for thatobedience?  It was to that obedience I owe her portrait."D'Artagnan was amazed to note by what fragile and unknown threadsthe destinies of nations and the lives of men are suspended.  Hewas lost in these reflections when the goldsmith entered.  He wasan Irishman--one of the most skillful of his craft, and whohimself confessed that he gained a hundred thousand livres a yearby the Duke of Buckingham.

    "Mr. O'Reilly," said the duke, leading him into the chapel, "lookat these diamond studs, and tell me what they are worth apiece."The goldsmith cast a glance at the elegant manner in which theywere set, calculated, one with another, what the diamonds wereworth, and without hesitation said, "Fifteen hundred pistoleseach, my Lord."

    "How many days would it require to make two studs exactly likethem?  You see there are two wanting."

    "Eight days, my Lord."

    "I will give you three thousand pistoles apiece if I can havethem by the day after tomorrow."

    "My Lord, they shall be yours."

    "You are a jewel of a man, Mr. O'Reilly; but that is not all.These studs cannot be trusted to anybody; it must be done in thepalace."

    "Impossible, my Lord!  There is no one but myself can so executethem that one cannot tell the new from the old."

    "Therefore, my dear Mr. O'Reilly, you are my prisoner.  And ifyou wish ever to leave my palace, you cannot; so make the best ofit.  Name to me such of your workmen as you need, and point outthe tools they must bring."

    The goldsmith knew the duke.  He knew all objection would beuseless, and instantly determined how to act.

    "May I be permitted to inform my wife?" said he.

    "Oh, you may even see her if you like, my dear Mr. O'Reilly.Your captivity shall be mild, be assured; and as everyinconvenience deserves its indemnification, here is, in additionto the price of the studs, an order for a thousand pistoles, tomake you forget the annoyance I cause you."

    D'Artagnan could not get over the surprise created in him by thisminister, who thus open-handed, sported with men and millions.As to the goldsmith, he wrote to his wife, sending her the orderfor the thousand pistoles, and charging her to send him, inexchange, his most skillful apprentice, an assortment ofdiamonds, of which he gave the names and the weight, and thenecessary tools.

    Buckingham conducted the goldsmith to the chamber destined forhim, and which, at the end of half an hour, was transformed intoa workshop.  Then he placed a sentinel at each door, with anorder to admit nobody upon any pretense but his VALET DE CHAMBRE,Patrick.  We need not add that the goldsmith, O'Reilly, and hisassistant, were prohibited from going out under any pretext.This point, settled, the duke turned to D'Artagnan.  "Now, myyoung friend," said he, "England is all our own.  What do youwish for?  What do you desire?"

    "A bed, my Lord," replied D'Artagnan.  "At present, I confess,that is the thing I stand most in need of."

    Buckingham gave D'Artagnan a chamber adjoining his own.  Hewished to have the young man at hand--not that he at allmistrusted him, but for the sake of having someone to whom hecould constantly talk of the queen.

    In one hour after, the ordinance was published in London that novessel bound for France should leave port, not even the packetboat with letters.  In the eyes of everybody this was adeclaration of war between the two kingdoms.

    On the day after the morrow, by eleven o'clock, the two diamondstuds were finished, and they were so completely imitated, soperfectly alike, that Buckingham could not tell the new ones fromthe old ones, and experts in such matters would have beendeceived as he was.  He immediately called D'Artagnan.  "Here,"said he to him, "are the diamond studs that you came to bring;and be my witness that I have done all that human power coulddo."

    "Be satisfied, my Lord, I will tell all that I have seen.  Butdoes your Grace mean to give me the studs without the casket?""The casket would encumber you.  Besides, the casket is the moreprecious from being all that is left to me.  You will say that Ikeep it."

    "I will perform your commission, word for word, my Lord.""And now," resumed Buckingham, looking earnestly at the youngman, "how shall I ever acquit myself of the debt I owe you?"D'Artagnan blushed up to the whites of his eyes.  He saw that theduke was searching for a means of making him accept something andthe idea that the blood of his friends and himself was about tobe paid for with English gold was strangely repugnant to him."Let us understand each other, my Lord," replied D'Artagnan, "andlet us make things clear beforehand in order that there may be nomistake.  I am in the service of the King and Queen of France,and form part of the company of Monsieur Dessessart, who, as wellas his brother-in-law, Monsieur de Treville, is particularlyattached to their Majesties.  What I have done, then, has beenfor the queen, and not at all for your Grace.  And still further,it is very probable I should not have done anything of this, ifit had not been to make myself agreeable to someone who is mylady, as the queen is yours."

    "Yes," said the duke, smiling, "and I even believe that I knowthat other person; it is--"

    "My Lord, I have not named her!" interrupted the young man,warmly.

    "That is true," said the duke; "and it is to this person I ambound to discharge my debt of gratitude."

    "You have said, my Lord; for truly, at this moment when there isquestion of war, I confess to you that I see nothing in yourGrace but an Englishman, and consequently an enemy whom I shouldhave much greater pleasure in meeting on the field of battle thanin the park at Windsor of the corridors of the Louvre--all which,however, will not prevent me from executing to the very point mycommission or from laying down my life, if there be need of it,to accomplish it; but I repeat it to your Grace, without yourhaving personally on that account more to thank me for in thissecond interview than for what I did for you in the first.""We say, 'Proud as a Scotsman,'" murmured the Duke of Buckingham."And we say, 'Proud as a Gascon,'" replied D'Artagnan.  "TheGascons are the Scots of France."

    D'Artagnan bowed to the duke, and was retiring.

    "Well, are you going away in that manner?  Where, and how?""That's true!"

    "Fore Gad, these Frenchmen have no consideration!""I had forgotten that England was an island, and that you werethe king of it."

    "Go to the riverside, ask for the brig SUND, and give this letterto the captain; he will convey you to a little port, wherecertainly you are not expected, and which is ordinarily onlyfrequented by fishermen."

    "The name of that port?"

    "St. Valery; but listen.  When you have arrived there you will goto a mean tavern, without a name and without a sign--a merefisherman's hut.  You cannot be mistaken; there is but one.""Afterward?"

    "You will ask for the host, and will repeat to him the word'Forward!'"

    "Which means?"

    "In French, EN AVANT.  It is the password.  He will give you ahorse all saddled, and will point out to you the road you oughtto take.  You will find, in the same way, four relays on yourroute.  If you will give at each of these relays your address inParis, the four horses will follow you thither.  You already knowtwo of them, and you appeared to appreciate them like a judge.They were those we rode on; and you may rely upon me for theothers not being inferior to them.  These horses are equipped forthe field.  However proud you may be, you will not refuse toaccept one of them, and to request your three companions toaccept the others--that is, in order to make war against us.Besides, the end justified the means, as you Frenchmen say, doesit not?"

    "Yes, my Lord, I accept them," said D'Artagnan; "and if it pleaseGod, we will make a good use of your presents."

    "Well, now, your hand, young man.  Perhaps we shall soon meet onthe field of battle; but in the meantime we shall part goodfriends, I hope."

    "Yes, my Lord; but with the hope of soon becoming enemies.""Be satisfied; I promise you that."

    "I depend upon your word, my Lord."

    D'Artagnan bowed to the duke, and made his way as quickly aspossible to the riverside.  Opposite the Tower of London he foundthe vessel that had been named to him, delivered his letter tothe captain, who after having it examined by the governor of theport made immediate preparations to sail.

    Fifty vessels were waiting to set out.  Passing alongside one ofthem, D'Artagnan fancied he perceived on board it the woman ofMeung--the same whom the unknown gentleman had called Milady, andwhom D'Artagnan had thought so handsome; but thanks to thecurrent of the stream and a fair wind, his vessel passed soquickly that he had little more than a glimpse of her.The next day about nine o'clock in the morning, he landed at St.Valery.  D'Artagnan went instantly in search of the inn, andeasily discovered it by the riotous noise which resounded fromit.  War between England and France was talked of as near andcertain, and the jolly sailors were having a carousal.D'Artagnan made his way through the crowd, advanced toward thehost, and pronounced the word "Forward!"  The host instantly madehim a sign to follow, went out with him by a door which openedinto a yard, led him to the stable, where a saddled horse awaitedhim, and asked him if he stood in need of anything else."I want to know the route I am to follow," said D'Artagnan."Go from hence to Blangy, and from Blangy to Neufchatel.  AtNeufchatel, go to the tavern of the Golden Harrow, give thepassword to the landlord, and you will find, as you have here, ahorse ready saddled."

    "Have I anything to pay?" demanded D'Artagnan.

    "Everything is paid," replied the host, "and liberally.  Begone,and may God guide you!"

    "Amen!" cried the young man, and set off at full gallop.Four hours later he was in Neufchatel.  He strictly followed theinstructions he had received.  At Neufchatel, as at St. Valery,he found a horse quite ready and awaiting him.  He was about toremove the pistols from the saddle he had quit to the one he wasabout to fill, but he found the holsters furnished with similarpistols.

    "Your address at Paris?"

    "Hotel of the Guards, company of Dessessart."

    "Enough," replied the questioner.

    "Which route must I take?" demanded D'Artagnan, in his turn."That of Rouen; but you will leave the city on your right.  Youmust stop at the little village of Eccuis, in which there is butone tavern--the Shield of France.  Don't condemn it fromappearances; you will find a horse in the stables quite as goodas this."

    "The same password?"

    "Exactly."

    "Adieu, master!"

    "A good journey, gentlemen!  Do you want anything?"D'Artagnan shook his head, and set off at full speed.  At Eccuis,the same scene was repeated.  He found as provident a host and afresh horse.  He left his address as he had done before, and setoff again at the same pace for Pontoise.  At Pontoise he changedhis horse for the last time, and at nine o'clock galloped intothe yard of Treville's hotel.  He had made nearly sixty leaguesin little more than twelve hours.

    M. de Treville received him as if he had seen him that samemorning; only, when pressing his hand a little more warmly thanusual, he informed him that the company of Dessessart was on dutyat the Louvre, and that he might repair at once to his post.

    22  THE BALLET OF LA MERLAISON

    On the morrow, nothing was talked of in Paris but the ball whichthe aldermen of the city were to give to the king and queen, andin which their Majesties were to dance the famous La Merlaison--the favorite ballet of the king.

    Eight days had been occupied in preparations at the Hotel deVille for this important evening.  The city carpenters haderected scaffolds upon which the invited ladies were to beplaced; the city grocer had ornamented the chambers with twohundred FLAMBEAUX if white wax, a piece of luxury unheard of atthat period; and twenty violins were ordered, and the price forthem fixed at double the usual rate, upon condition, said thereport, that they should be played all night.

    At ten o'clock in the morning the Sieur de la Coste, ensign inthe king's Guards, followed by two officers and several archersof that body, came to the city registrar, named Clement, anddemanded of him all the keys of the rooms and offices of thehotel.  These keys were given up to him instantly.  Each of themhad ticket attached to it, by which it might be recognized; andfrom that moment the Sieur de la Coste was charged with the careof all the doors and all the avenues.

    At eleven o'clock came in his turn Duhallier, captain of theGuards, bringing with him fifty archers, who were distributedimmediately through the Hotel de Ville, at the doors assignedthem.

    At three o'clock came two companies of the Guards, one French,the other Swiss.  The company of French guards was composed ofhalf of M. Duhallier's men and half of M. Dessessart's men.At six in the evening the guests began to come.  As fast as theyentered, they were placed in the grand saloon, on the platformsprepared for them.

    At nine o'clock Madame la Premiere Presidente arrived.  As nextto the queen, she was the most considerable personage of thefete, she was received by the city officials, and placed in a boxopposite to that which the queen was to occupy.

    At ten o'clock, the king's collation, consisting of preserves andother delicacies, was prepared in the little room on the side ofthe church of St. Jean, in front of the silver buffet of thecity, which was guarded by four archers.

    At midnight great cries and loud acclamations were heard.  It wasthe king, who was passing through the streets which led from theLouvre to the Hotel de Ville, and which were all illuminated withcolored lanterns.

    Immediately the alderman, clothed in their cloth robes andpreceded by six sergeants, each holding a FLAMBEAU in his hand,went to attend upon the king, whom they met on the steps, wherethe provost of the merchants made him the speech of welcome--acompliment to which his Majesty replied with an apology forcoming so late, laying the blame upon the cardinal, who haddetained him till eleven o'clock, talking of affairs of state.His Majesty, in full dress, was accompanied by his royalHighness, M. le Comte de Soissons, by the Grand Prior, by the Ducde Longueville, by the Duc d'Euboeuf, by the Comte d'Harcourt, bythe Comte de la Roche-Guyon, by M. de Liancourt, by M. deBaradas, by the Comte de Cramail, and by the Chevalier deSouveray.  Everybody noticed that the king looked dull andpreoccupied.

    A private room had been prepared for the king and another forMonsieur.  In each of these closets were placed masqueradedresses.  The same had been done for the queen and Madame thePresident.  The nobles and ladies of their Majesties' suites wereto dress, two by two, in chambers prepared for the purpose.Before entering his closet the king desired to be informed themoment the cardinal arrived.

    Half an hour after the entrance of the king, fresh acclamationswere heard; these announced the arrival of the queen.  Thealdermen did as they had done before, and preceded by theirsergeants, advanced to receive their illustrious guest.  Thequeen entered the great hall; and it was remarked that, like theking, she looked dull and even weary.

    At the moment she entered, the curtain of a small gallery whichto that time had been closed, was drawn, and the pale face of thecardinal appeared, he being dresses as a Spanish cavalier.  Hiseyes were fixed upon those of the queen, and a smile of terriblejoy passed over his lips; the queen did not wear her diamondstuds.

    The queen remained for a short time to receive the compliments ofthe city dignitaries and to reply to the salutations of theladies.  All at once the king appeared with the cardinal at oneof the doors of the hall.  The cardinal was speaking to him in alow voice, and the king was very pale.

    The king made his way through the crowd without a mask, and theribbons of his doublet scarcely tied.  He went straight to thequeen, and in an altered voice said, "Why, madame, have you notthought proper to wear your diamond studs, when you know it wouldgive me so much gratification?"

    The queen cast a glance around her, and saw the cardinal behind,with a diabolical smile on his countenance.

    "Sire," replied the queen, with a faltering voice, "because, inthe midst of such a crowd as this, I feared some accident mighthappen to them."

    "And you were wrong, madame.  If I made you that present it wasthat you might adorn yourself therewith.  I tell you that youwere wrong."

    The voice of the king was tremulous with anger.  Everybody lookedand listened with astonishment, comprehending nothing of whatpassed.

    "Sire," said the queen, "I can send for them to the Louvre, wherethey are, and thus your Majesty's wishes will be complied with.""Do so, madame, do so, and that at once; for within an hour theballet will commence."

    The queen bent in token of submission, and followed the ladieswho were to conduct her to her room.  On his part the kingreturned to his apartment.

    There was a moment of trouble and confusion in the assembly.Everybody had remarked that something had passed between the kingand queen; but both of them had spoken so low that everybody, outof respect, withdrew several steps, so that nobody had heardanything.  The violins began to sound with all their might, butnobody listened to them.

    The king came out first from his room.  He was in a most eleganthunting costume; and Monsieur and the other nobles were dressedlike him.  This was the costume that best became the king.  Sodressed, he really appeared the first gentleman of his kingdom.The cardinal drew near to the king, and placed in his hand asmall casket.  The king opened it, and found in it two diamondstuds.

    "What does this mean?" demanded he of the cardinal."Nothing," replied the latter; "only, if the queen has the studs,which I very much doubt, count them, sire, and if you only findten, ask her Majesty who can have stolen from her the two studsthat are here."

    The king looked at the cardinal as if to interrogate him; but hehad not time to address any question to him--a cry of admirationburst from every mouth.  If the king appeared to be the firstgentleman of his kingdom, the queen was without doubt the mostbeautiful woman in France.

    It is true that the habit of a huntress became her admirably.She wore a beaver had with blue feathers, a surtout of gray-pearlvelvet, fastened with diamond clasps, and a petticoat of bluesatin, embroidered with silver.  On her left shoulder sparkledthe diamonds studs, on a bow of the same color as the plumes andthe petticoat.

    The king trembled with joy and the cardinal with vexation;although, distant as they were from the queen, they could notcount the studs.  The queen had them.  The only question was, hadshe ten or twelve?

    At that moment the violins sounded the signal for the ballet.The king advanced toward Madame the President, with whom he wasto dance, and his Highness Monsieur with the queen.  They tooktheir places, and the ballet began.

    The king danced facing the queen, and every time he passed byher, he devoured with his eyes those studs of which he could notascertain the number.  A cold sweat covered the brow of thecardinal.

    The ballet lasted an hour, and had sixteen ENTREES.  The balletended amid the applause of the whole assemblage, and everyonereconducted his lady to her place; but the king took advantage ofthe privilege he had of leaving his lady, to advance eagerlytoward the queen.

    "I thank you, madame," said he, "for the deference you have shownto my wishes, but I think you want two of the studs, and I bringthem back to you."

    With these words he held out to the queen the two studs thecardinal had given him.

    "How, sire?" cried the young queen, affecting surprise, "you aregiving me, then, two more:  I shall have fourteen."In fact the king counted them, and the twelve studs were all onher Majesty's shoulder.

    The king called the cardinal.

    "What does this mean, Monsieur Cardinal?" asked the king in asevere tone.

    "This means, sire," replied the cardinal, "that I was desirous ofpresenting her Majesty with these two studs, and that not daringto offer them myself, I adopted this means of inducing her toaccept them."

    "And I an the more grateful to your Eminence," replied Anne ofAustria, with a smile that proved she was not the dupe of thisingenious gallantry, "from being certain that these two studsalone have cost you as much as all the others cost his Majesty."Then saluting the king and the cardinal, the queen resumed herway to the chamber in which she had dressed, and where she was totake off her costume.

    The attention which we have been obliged to give, during thecommencement of the chapter, to the illustrious personages wehave introduced into it, has diverted us for an instant from himto whom Anne of Austria owed the extraordinary triumph she hadobtained over the cardinal; and who, confounded, unknown, lost inthe crowd gathered at one of the doors, looked on at this scene,comprehensible only to four persons--the king, the queen, hisEminence, and himself.

    The queen had just regained her chamber, and D'Artagnan was aboutto retire, when he felt his should lightly touched.  He turnedand saw a young woman, who made him a sign to follow her.  Theface of this young woman was covered with a black velvet mask;but notwithstanding this precaution, which was in fact takenrather against others than against him, he at once recognized hisusual guide, the light and intelligent Mme. Bonacieux.On the evening before, they had scarcely seen each other for amoment at the apartment of the Swiss guard, Germain, whitherD'Artagnan had sent for her.  The haste which the young woman wasin to convey to the queen the excellent news of the happy returnof her messenger prevented the two lovers from exchanging morethan a few words.  D'Artagnan therefore followed Mme. Bonacieuxmoved by a double sentiment--love and curiosity.  All the way,and in proportion as the corridors became more deserted,D'Artagnan wished to stop the young woman, seize her and gazeupon her, were it only for a minute; but quick as a bird sheglided between his hands, and when he wished to speak to her, herfinger placed upon her mouth, with a little imperative gesturefull of grace, reminded him that he was under the command of apower which he must blindly obey, and which forbade him even tomake the slightest complaint.  At length, after winding about fora minute or two, Mme. Bonacieux opened the door of a closet,which was entirely dark, and led D'Artagnan into it.  There shemade a fresh sign of silence, and opened a second door concealedby tapestry.  The opening of this door disclosed a brilliantlight, and she disappeared.

    D'Artagnan remained for a moment motionless, asking himself wherehe could be; but soon a ray of light which penetrated through thechamber, together with the warm and perfumed air which reachedhim from the same aperture, the conversation of two of threeladies in language at once respectful and refined, and the word"Majesty" several times repeated, indicated clearly that he wasin a closet attached to the queen's apartment.  The young manwaited in comparative darkness and listened.

    The queen appeared cheerful and happy, which seemed to astonishthe persons who surrounded her and who were accustomed to see heralmost always sad and full of care.  The queen attributed thisjoyous feeling to the beauty of the fete, to the pleasure she hadexperienced in the ballet; and as it is not permissible tocontradict a queen, whether she smile or weep, everybodyexpatiated on the gallantry of the aldermen of the city of Paris.Although D'Artagnan did not at all know the queen, he soondistinguished her voice from the others, at first by a slightlyforeign accent, and next by that tone of domination naturallyimpressed upon all royal words.  He heard her approach andwithdraw from the partially open door; and twice or three timeshe even saw the shadow of a person intercept the light.At length a hand and an arm, surpassingly beautiful in their formand whiteness, glided through the tapestry.  D'Artagnan at oncecomprehended that this was his recompense.  He cast himself onhis knees, seized the hand, and touched it respectfully with hislips.  Then the hand was withdrawn, leaving in his an objectwhich he perceived to be a ring.  The door immediately closed,and D'Artagnan found himself again in complete obscurity.D'Artagnan placed the ring on his finger, and again waited; itwas evident that all was not yet over.  After the reward of hisdevotion, that of his love was to come.  Besides, although theballet was danced, the evening had scarcely begun.  Supper was tobe served at three, and the clock of St. Jean had struck threequarters past two.

    The sound of voices diminished by degrees in the adjoiningchamber.  The company was then heard departing; then the door ofthe closet in which D'Artagnan was, was opened, and Mme.Bonacieux entered.

    "You at last?" cried D'Artagnan.

    "Silence!" said the young woman, placing her hand upon his lips;"silence, and go the same way you came!"

    "But where and when shall I see you again?" cried D'Artagnan."A note which you will find at home will tell you.  Begone,begone!"

    At these words she opened the door of the corridor, and pushedD'Artagnan out of the room.  D'Artagnan obeyed like a child,without the least resistance or objection, which proved that hewas really in love.

    23  THE RENDEZVOUS

    D'Artagnan ran home immediately, and although it was threeo'clock in the morning and he had some of the worst quarters ofParis to traverse, he met with no misadventure.  Everyone knowsthat drunkards and lovers have a protecting deity.He found the door of his passage open, sprang up the stairs andknocked softly in a manner agreed upon between him and hislackey.  Planchet*, whom he had sent home two hours before fromthe Hotel de Ville, telling him to sit up for him, opened thedoor for him.

    *The reader may ask, "How came Planchet here?" when he was left"stiff as a rush" in London.  In the intervening time Buckinghamperhaps sent him to Paris, as he did the horses.

    "Has anyone brought a letter for me?" asked D'Artagnan, eagerly."No one has BROUGHT a letter, monsieur," replied Planchet; "butone has come of itself."

    "What do you mean, blockhead?"

    "I mean to say that when I came in, although I had the key ofyour apartment in my pocket, and that key had never quit me, Ifound a letter on the green table cover in your bedroom.""And where is that letter?"

    "I left it where I found it, monsieur.  It is not natural forletters to enter people's houses in this manner.  If the windowhad been open or even ajar, I should think nothing of it; but,no--all was hermetically sealed.  Beware, monsieur; there iscertainly some magic underneath."

    Meanwhile, the young man had darted in to his chamber, and openedthe letter.  It was from Mme. Bonacieux, and was expressed inthese terms:

    "There are many thanks to be offered to you, and to betransmitted to you.  Be this evening about ten o'clock at St.Cloud, in front of the pavilion which stands at the corner of thehouse of M. d'Estrees.--C.B."

    While reading this letter, D'Artagnan felt his heart dilated andcompressed by that delicious spasm which tortures and caressesthe hearts of lovers.

    It was the first billet he had received; it was the firstrendezvous that had been granted him.  His heart, swelled by theintoxication of joy, felt ready to dissolve away at the very gateof that terrestrial paradise called Love!

    "Well, monsieur," said Planchet, who had observed his master growread and pale successively, "did I not guess truly?  Is it notsome bad affair?"

    "You are mistaken, Planchet," replied D'Artagnan; "and as aproof, there is a crown to drink my health."

    "I am much obliged to Monsieur for the crown he had given me, andI promise him to follow his instructions exactly; but it is notthe less true that letters which come in this way into shut-uphouses--"

    "Fall from heaven, my friend, fall from heaven."

    "Then Monsieur is satisfied?" asked Planchet.

    "My dear Planchet, I an the happiest of men!"

    "And I may profit by Monsieur's happiness, and go to bed?""Yes, go."

    "May the blessings of heaven fall upon Monsieur!  But it is notthe less true that that letter--"

    And Planchet retired, shaking his head with an air of doubt,which the liberality of D'Artagnan had not entirely effaced.Left alone, D'Artagnan read and reread his billet.  Then hekissed and rekissed twenty times the lines traced by the hand ofhis beautiful mistress.  At length he went to bed, fell asleep,and had golden dreams.

    At seven o'clock in the morning he arose and called Planchet, whoat the second summons opened the door, his countenance not yetquite freed from the anxiety of the preceding night."Planchet," said D'Artagnan, "I am going out for all day,perhaps.  You are, therefore, your own master till seven o'clockin the evening; but at seven o'clock you must hold yourself inreadiness with two horses."

    "There!" said Planchet.  "We are going again, it appears, to haveour hides pierced in all sorts of ways."

    "You will take your musketoon and your pistols."

    "There, now!  Didn't I say so?" cried Planchet.  "I was sure ofit--the cursed letter!"

    "Don't be afraid, you idiot; there is nothing in hand but a partyof pleasure."

    "Ah, like the charming journey the other day, when it rainedbullets and produced a crop of steel traps!"

    "Well, if you are really afraid, Monsieur Planchet," resumedD'Artagnan, "I will go without you.  I prefer traveling alone tohaving a companion who entertains the least fear.""Monsieur does me wrong," said Planchet; "I thought he had seenme at work."

    "Yes, but I thought perhaps you had worn out all your courage thefirst time."

    "Monsieur shall see that upon occasion I have some left; only Ibeg Monsieur not to be too prodigal of it if he wishes it to lastlong."

    "Do you believe you have still a certain amount of it to expendthis evening?"

    "I hope so, monsieur."

    "Well, then, I count on you."

    "At the appointed hour I shall be ready; only I believed thatMonsieur had but one horse in the Guard stables.""Perhaps there is but one at this moment; but by this eveningthere will be four."

    "It appears that our journey was a remounting journey, then?""Exactly so," said D'Artagnan; and nodding to Planchet, he wentout.

    M. Bonacieux was at his door.  D'Artagnan's intention was to goout without speaking to the worthy mercer; but the latter made sopolite and friendly a salutation that his tenant felt obliged,not only to stop, but to enter into conversation with him.Besides, how is it possible to avoid a little condescensiontoward a husband whose pretty wife has appointed a meeting withyou that same evening at St. Cloud, opposite D'Estrees'spavilion?  D'Artagnan approached him with the most amiable air hecould assume.

    The conversation naturally fell upon the incarceration of thepoor man.  M. Bonacieux, who was ignorant that D'Artagnan hadoverheard his conversation with the stranger of Meung, related tohis young tenant the persecutions of that monster, M. deLaffemas, whom he never ceased to designate, during his account,by the title of the "cardinal's executioner," and expatiated atgreat length upon the Bastille, the bolts, the wickets, thedungeons, the gratings, the instruments of torture.D'Artagnan listened to him with exemplary complaisance, and whenhe had finished said, "And Madame Bonacieux, do you know whocarried her off?--For I do not forget that I owe to thatunpleasant circumstance the good fortune of having made youracquaintance."

    "Ah!" said Bonacieux, "they took good care not to tell me that;and my wife, on her part, has sworn to me by all that's sacredthat she does not know.  But you," continued M. Bonacieux, in atine of perfect good fellowship, "what has become of you allthese days?  I have not seen you nor your friends, and I don'tthink you could gather all that dust that I saw Planchet brushoff your boots yesterday from the pavement of Paris.""You are right, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, my friends and I havebeen on a little journey."

    "Far from here?"

    "Oh, Lord, no!  About forty leagues only.  We went to takeMonsieur Athos to the waters of Forges, where my friends stillremain."

    "And you have returned, have you not?" replied M. Bonacieux,giving to his countenance a most sly air.  "A handsome youngfellow like you does not obtain long leaves of absence from hismistress; and we were impatiently waited for at Paris, were wenot?"

    "My faith!" said the young man, laughing, "I confess it, and somuch more the readily, my dear Bonacieux, as I see there is noconcealing anything from you.  Yes, I was expected, and veryimpatiently, I acknowledge."

    A slight shade passed over the brow of Bonacieux, but so slightthat D'Artagnan did not perceive it.

    "And we are going to be recompensed for our diligence?" continuedthe mercer, with a trifling alteration in his voice--so trifling,indeed, that D'Artagnan did not perceive it any more than he hadthe momentary shade which, an instant before, had darkened thecountenance of the worthy man.

    "Ah, may you be a true prophet!" said D'Artagnan, laughing."No; what I say," replied Bonacieux, "is only that I may knowwhether I am delaying you."

    "Why that question, my dear host?" asked D'Artagnan.  "Do youintend to sit up for me?"

    "No; but since my arrest and the robbery that was committed in myhouse, I am alarmed every time I hear a door open, particularlyin the night.  What the deuce can you expect?  I am noswordsman."

    "Well, don't be alarmed if I return at one, two or three o'clockin the morning; indeed, do not be alarmed if I do not come atall."

    This time Bonacieux became so pale that D'Artagnan could not helpperceiving it, and asked him what was the matter."Nothing," replied Bonacieux, "nothing.  Since my misfortunes Ihave been subject to faintnesses, which seize me all at once, andI have just felt a cold shiver.  Pay no attention to it; you havenothing to occupy yourself with but being happy.""Then I have full occupation, for I am so."

    "Not yet; wait a little!  This evening, you said.""Well, this evening will come, thank God!  And perhaps you lookfor it with as much impatience as I do; perhaps this eveningMadame Bonacieux will visit the conjugal domicile.""Madame Bonacieux is not at liberty this evening," replied thehusband, seriously; "she is detained at the Louvre this eveningby her duties."

    "So much the worse for you, my dear host, so much the worse!When I am happy, I wish all the world to be so; but it appearsthat is not possible."

    The young man departed, laughing at the joke, which he thought healone could comprehend.

    "Amuse yourself well!" replied Bonacieux, in a sepulchral tone.But D'Artagnan was too far off to hear him; and if he had heardhim in the disposition of mind he then enjoyed, he certainlywould not have remarked it.

    He took his way toward the hotel of M. de Treville; his visit ofthe day before, it is to be remembered, had been very short andvery little explicative.

    He found Treville in a joyful mood.  He had thought the king andqueen charming at the ball.  It is true the cardinal had beenparticularly ill-tempered.  He had retired at one o'clock underthe pretense of being indisposed.  As to their Majesties, theydid not return to the Louvre till six o'clock in the morning."Now," said Treville, lowering his voice, and looking into everycorner of the apartment to see if they were alone, "now let ustalk about yourself, my young friend; for it is evident that yourhappy return has something to do with the joy of the king, thetriumph of the queen, and the humiliation of his Eminence.  Youmust look out for yourself."

    "What have I to fear," replied D'Artagnan, "as long as I shallhave the luck to enjoy the favor of their Majesties?""Everything, believe me.  The cardinal is not the man to forget amystification until he has settled account with the mystifier;and the mystifier appears to me to have the air of being acertain young Gascon of my acquaintance."

    "Do you believe that the cardinal is as well posted as yourself,and knows that I have been to London?"

    "The devil!  You have been to London!  Was it from London youbrought that beautiful diamond that glitters on your finger?Beware, my dear D'Artagnan!  A present from an enemy is not agood thing.  Are there not some Latin verses upon that subject?Stop!"

    "Yes, doubtless," replied D'Artagnan, who had never been able tocram the first rudiments of that language into his head, and whohad by his ignorance driven his master to despair, "yes,doubtless there is one."

    "There certainly is one," said M. de Treville, who had a tinctureof literature, "and Monsieur de Benserade was quoting it to methe other day.  Stop a minute--ah, this is it:  'Timeo Danaos etdona ferentes,' which means, 'Beware of the enemy who makes youpresents."

    "This diamond does not come from an enemy, monsieur," repliedD'Artagnan, "it comes from the queen."

    "From the queen! Oh, oh!" said M. de Treville.  "Why, it isindeed a true royal jewel, which is worth a thousand pistoles ifit is worth a denier.  By whom did the queen send you thisjewel?"

    "She gave it to me herself."

    "Where?"

    "In the room adjoining the chamber in which she changed hertoilet."

    "How?"

    "Giving me her hand to kiss."

    "You have kissed the queen's hand?" said M. de Treville, lookingearnestly at D'Artagnan.

    "Her Majesty did me the honor to grant me that favor.""And that in the presence of witnesses!  Imprudent, thriceimprudent!"

    "No, monsieur, be satisfied; nobody saw her," replied D'Artagnan,and he related to M. de Treville how the affair came to pass."Oh, the women, the women!" cried the old soldier.  "I know themby their romantic imagination.  Everything that savors of mysterycharms them.  So you have seen the arm, that was all.  You wouldmeet the queen, and she would not know who you are?""No; but thanks to this diamond," replied the young man."Listen," said M. de Treville; "shall I give you counsel, goodcounsel, the counsel of a friend?"

    "You will do me honor, monsieur," said D'Artagnan."Well, then, off to the nearest goldsmith's, and sell thatdiamond for the highest price you can get from him.  However muchof a Jew he may be, he will give you at least eight hundredpistoles.  Pistoles have no name, young man, and that ring has aterrible one, which may betray him who wears it.""Sell this ring, a ring which comes from my sovereign?  Never!"said D'Artagnan.

    "Then, at least turn the gem inside, you silly fellow; foreverybody must be aware that a cadet from Gascony does not findsuch stones in his mother's jewel case."

    "You think, then, I have something to dread?" asked D'Artagnan."I mean to say, young man, that he who sleeps over a mine thematch of which is already lighted, may consider himself in safetyin comparison with you."

    "The devil!" said D'Artagnan, whom the positive tone of M. deTreville began to disquiet, "the devil!  What must I do?""Above all things be always on your guard.  The cardinal has atenacious memory and a long arm; you may depend upon it, he willrepay you by some ill turn."

    "But of what sort?"

    "Eh!  How can I tell?  Has he not all the tricks of a demon athis command?  The least that can be expected is that you will bearrested."

    "What!  Will they dare to arrest a man in his Majesty's service?""PARDIEU!  They did not scruple much in the case of Athos.  Atall events, young man, rely upon one who has been thirty years atcourt.  Do not lull yourself in security, or you will be lost;but, on the contrary--and it is I who say it--see enemies in alldirections.  If anyone seeks a quarrel with you, shun it, were itwith a child of ten years old.  If you are attacked by day or bynight, fight, but retreat, without shame; if you cross a bridge,feel every plank of it with your foot, lest one should give waybeneath you; if you pass before a house which is being built,look up, for fear a stone should fall upon your head; if you stayout late, be always followed by your lackey, and let your lackeybe armed--if, by the by, you can be sure of your lackey.Mistrust everybody, your friend, your brother, your mistress--your mistress above all."

    D'Artagnan blushed.

    "My mistress above all," repeated he, mechanically; "and why herrather than another?"

    "Because a mistress is one of the cardinal's favorite means; hehas not one that is more expeditious.  A woman will sell you forten pistoles, witness Delilah.  You are acquainted with theScriptures?"

    D'Artagnan thought of the appointment Mme. Bonacieux had madewith him for that very evening; but we are bound to say, to thecredit of our hero, that the bad opinion entertained by M. deTreville of women in general, did not inspire him with the leastsuspicion of his pretty hostess.

    "But, A PROPOS," resumed M. de Treville, "what has become of yourthree companions?"

    "I was about to ask you if you had heard any news of them?""None, monsieur."

    "Well, I left them on my road--Porthos at Chantilly, with a duelon his hands; Aramis at Crevecoeur, with a ball in his shoulder;and Athos at Amiens, detained by an accusation of coining.""See there, now!" said M. de Treville; "and how the devil did youescape?"

    "By a miracle, monsieur, I must acknowledge, with a sword thrustin my breast, and by nailing the Comte de Wardes on the byroad toCalais, like a butterfly on a tapestry."

    "There again!  De Wardes, one of the cardinal's men, a cousin ofRochefort!  Stop, my friend, I have an idea."

    "Speak, monsieur."

    "In your place, I would do one thing."

    "What?"

    "While his Eminence was seeking for me in Paris, I would take,without sound of drum or trumpet, the road to Picardy, and wouldgo and make some inquiries concerning my three companions.  Whatthe devil!  They merit richly that piece of attention on yourpart."

    "The advice is good, monsieur, and tomorrow I will set out.""Tomorrow!  Any why not this evening?"

    "This evening, monsieur, I am detained in Paris by indispensablebusiness."

    "Ah, young man, young man, some flirtation or other.  Take care,I repeat to you, take care.  It is woman who has ruined us, stillruins us, and will ruin us, as long as the world stands.  Take myadvice and set out this evening."

    "Impossible, monsieur."

    "You have given your word, then?"

    "Yes, monsieur."

    "Ah, that's quite another thing; but promise me, if you shouldnot be killed tonight, that you will go tomorrow.""I promise it."

    "Do you need money?"

    "I have still fifty pistoles.  That, I think, is as much as Ishall want."

    "But your companions?"

    "I don't think they can be in need of any.  We left Paris, eachwith seventy-five pistoles in his pocket."

    "Shall I see you again before your departure?"

    "I think not, monsieur, unless something new should happen.""Well, a pleasant journey."

    "Thanks, monsieur."

    D'Artagnan left M. de Treville, touched more than ever by hispaternal solicitude for his Musketeers.

    He called successively at the abodes of Athos, Porthos, andAramis.  Neither of them had returned.  Their lackeys likewisewere absent, and nothing had been heard of either the one or theother.  He would have inquired after them of their mistresses,but he was neither acquainted with Porthos's nor Aramis's, and asto Athos, he had none.

    As he passed the Hotel des Gardes, he took a glance in to thestables.  Three of the four horses had already arrived.Planchet, all astonishment, was busy grooming them, and hadalready finished two.

    "Ah, monsieur," said Planchet, on perceiving D'Artagnan, "howglad I am to see you."

    "Why so, Planchet?" asked the young man.

    "Do you place confidence in our landlord--Monsieur Bonacieux?""I?  Not the least in the world."

    "Oh, you do quite right, monsieur."

    "But why this question?"

    "Because, while you were talking with him, I watched you withoutlistening to you; and, monsieur, his countenance changed colortwo or three times!"

    "Bah!"

    "Preoccupied as Monsieur was with the letter he had received, hedid not observe that; but I, whom the strange fashion in whichthat letter came into the house had placed on my guard--I did notlose a movement of his features."

    "And you found it?"

    "Traitorous, monsieur."

    "Indeed!"

    "Still more; as soon as Monsieur had left and disappeared roundthe corner of the street, Monsieur Bonacieux took his hat, shuthis door, and set off at a quick pace in an opposite direction.""It seems you are right, Planchet; all this appears to be alittle mysterious; and be assured that we will not pay him ourrent until the matter shall be categorically explained to us.""Monsieur jests, but Monsieur will see."

    "What would you have, Planchet?  What must come is written.""Monsieur does not then renounce his excursion for this evening?""Quite the contrary, Planchet; the more ill will I have towardMonsieur Bonacieux, the more punctual I shall be in keeping theappointment made by that letter which makes you so uneasy.""Then that is Monsieur's determination?"

    "Undeniably, my friend.  At nine o'clock, then, be ready here atthe hotel, I will come and take you."

    Planchet seeing there was no longer any hope of making his masterrenounce his project, heaved a profound sigh and set to work togroom the third horse.

    As to D'Artagnan, being at bottom a prudent youth, instead ofreturning him he went and dined with the Gascon priest, who, atthe time of the distress of the four friends, had given them abreakfast of chocolate.

    24 THE PAVILION

    At nine o'clock D'Artagnan was at the Hotel des Gardes; he foundPlanchet all ready.  The fourth horse had arrived.Planchet was armed with his musketoon and a pistol.  D'Artagnanhad his sword and placed two pistols in his belt; then bothmounted and departed quietly.  It was quite dark, and no one sawthem go out.  Planchet took place behind his master, and kept ata distance of ten paces from him.

    D'Artagnan crossed the quays, went out by the gate of LaConference and followed the road, much more beautiful then thanit is now, which leads to St. Cloud.

    As long as he was in the city, Planchet kept at the respectfuldistance he had imposed upon himself; but as soon as the roadbegan to be more lonely and dark, he drew softly nearer, so thatwhen they entered the Bois de Boulogne he found himself ridingquite naturally side by side with his master.  In fact, we mustnot dissemble that the oscillation of the tall trees and thereflection of the moon in the dark underwood gave him seriousuneasiness.  D'Artagnan could not help perceiving that somethingmore than usual was passing in the mind of his lackey and said,"Well, Monsieur Planchet, what is the matter with us now?""Don't you think, monsieur, that woods are like churches?""How so, Planchet?"

    "Because we dare not speak aloud in one or the other.""But why did you not dare to speak aloud, Planchet--because youare afraid?"

    "Afraid of being heard?  Yes, monsieur."

    "Afraid of being heard!  Why, there is nothing improper in ourconversation, my dear Planchet, and no one could find fault withit."

    "Ah, monsieur!" replied Planchet, recurring to his besettingidea, "that Monsieur Bonacieux has something vicious in hiseyebrows, and something very unpleasant in the play of his lips.""What the devil makes you think of Bonacieux?"

    "Monsieur, we think of what we can, and not of what we will.""Because you are a coward, Planchet."

    "Monsieur, we must not confound prudence with cowardice; prudenceis a virtue."

    "And you are very virtuous, are you not, Planchet?""Monsieur, is not that the barrel of a musket which glittersyonder?  Had we not better lower our heads?"

    "In truth," murmured D'Artagnan, to whom M. de Treville'srecommendation recurred, "this animal will end by making meafraid."  And he put his horse into a trot.

    Planchet followed the movements of his master as if he had beenhis shadow, and was soon trotting by his side.

    "Are we going to continue this pace all night?" asked Planchet."No; you are at your journey's end."

    "How, monsieur!  And you?"

    "I am going a few steps farther."

    "And Monsieur leaves me here alone?"

    "You are afraid, Planchet?"

    "No; I only beg leave to observe to Monsieur that the night willbe very cold, that chills bring on rheumatism, and that a lackeywho has the rheumatism makes but a poor servant, particularly toa master as active as Monsieur."

    "Well, if you are cold, Planchet, you can go into one of thosecabarets that you see yonder, and be in waiting for me at thedoor by six o'clock in the morning."

    "Monsieur, I have eaten and drunk respectfully the crown you gaveme this morning, so that I have not a sou left in case I shouldbe cold."

    "Here's half a pistole.  Tomorrow morning."

    D'Artagnan sprang from his horse, threw the bridle to Planchet,and departed at a quick pace, folding his cloak around him."Good Lord, how cold I am!" cried Planchet, as soon as he hadlost sight of his master; and in such haste was he to warmhimself that he went straight to a house set out with all theattributes of a suburban tavern, and knocked at the door.In the meantime D'Artagnan, who had plunged into a bypath,continued his route and reached St. Cloud; but instead offollowing the main street he turned behind the chateau, reached asort of retired lane, and found himself soon in front of thepavilion named.  It was situated in a very private spot.  A highwall, at the angle of which was the pavilion, ran along one sideof this lane, and on the other was a little garden connected witha poor cottage which was protected by a hedge from passers-by.He gained the place appointed, and as no signal had been givenhim by which to announce his presence, he waited.Not the least noise was to be heard; it might be imagined that hewas a hundred miles from the capital.  D'Artagnan leaned againstthe hedge, after having cast a glance behind it.  Beyond thathedge, that garden, and that cottage, a dark mist enveloped withits folds that immensity where Paris slept--a vast void fromwhich glittered a few luminous points, the funeral stars of thathell!

    But for D'Artagnan all aspects were clothed happily, all ideaswore a smile, all shades were diaphanous.  The appointed hour wasabout to strike.  In fact, at the end of a few minutes the belfryof St. Cloud let fall slowly then strokes from its sonorous jaws.There was something melancholy in this brazen voice pouring outits lamentations in the middle of the night; but each of thosestrokes, which made up the expected hour, vibrated harmoniouslyto the heart of the young man.

    His eyes were fixed upon the little pavilion situated at theangle of the wall, of which all the windows were closed withshutters, except one on the first story.  Through this windowshone a mild light which silvered the foliage of two or threelinden trees which formed a group outside the park.  There couldbe no doubt that behind this little window, which threw forthsuch friendly beams, the pretty Mme. Bonacieux expected him.Wrapped in this sweet idea, D'Artagnan waited half an hourwithout the least impatience, his eyes fixed upon that charminglittle abode of which he could perceive a part of the ceilingwith its gilded moldings, attesting the elegance of the rest ofthe apartment.

    The belfry of St. Cloud sounded half past ten.

    This time, without knowing why, D'Artagnan felt a cold shiver runthrough his veins.  Perhaps the cold began to affect him, and hetook a perfectly physical sensation for a moral impression.Then the idea seized him that he had read incorrectly, and thatthe appointment was for eleven o'clock.  He drew near to thewindow, and placing himself so that a ray of light should fallupon the letter as he held it, he drew it from his pocket andread it again; but he had not been mistaken, the appointment wasfor ten o'clock.  He went and resumed his post, beginning to berather uneasy at this silence and this solitude.

    Eleven o'clock sounded.

    D'Artagnan began now really to fear that something had happenedto Mme. Bonacieux.  He clapped his hands three times--theordinary signal of lovers; but nobody replied to him, not even anecho.

    He then thought, with a touch of vexation, that perhaps the youngwoman had fallen asleep while waiting for him.  He approached thewall, and tried to climb it; but the wall had been recentlypointed, and D'Artagnan could get no hold.

    At that moment he thought of the trees, upon whose leaves thelight still shone; and as one of them drooped over the road, hethought that from its branches he might get a glimpse of theinterior of the pavilion.

    The tree was easy to climb.  Besides, D'Artagnan was but twentyyears old, and consequently had not yet forgotten his schoolboyhabits.  In an instant he was among the branches, and his keeneyes plunged through the transparent panes into the interior ofthe pavilion.

    It was a strange thing, and one which made D'Artagnan tremblefrom the sole of his foot to the roots of his hair, to find thatthis soft light, this calm lamp, enlightened a scene of fearfuldisorder.  One of the windows was broken, the door of the chamberhad been beaten in and hung, split in two, on its hinges.  Atable, which had been covered with an elegant supper, wasoverturned.  The decanters broken in pieces, and the fruitscrushed, strewed the floor.  Everything in the apartment gaveevidence of a violent and desperate struggle.  D'Artagnan evenfancied he could recognize amid this strange disorder, fragmentsof garments, and some bloody spots staining the cloth and thecurtains.  He hastened to descend into the street, with afrightful beating at his heart; he wished to see if he could findother traces of violence.

    The little soft light shone on in the calmness of the night.D'Artagnan then perceived a thing that he had not beforeremarked--for nothing had led him to the examination--that theground, trampled here and hoofmarked there, presented confusedtraces of men and horses.  Besides, the wheels of a carriage,which appeared to have come from Paris, had made a deepimpression in the soft earth, which did not extend beyond thepavilion, but turned again toward Paris.

    At length D'Artagnan, in pursuing his researches, found near thewall a woman's torn glove.  This glove, wherever it had nottouched the muddy ground, was of irreproachable odor.  It was oneof those perfumed gloves that lovers like to snatch from a prettyhand.

    As D'Artagnan pursued his investigations, a more abundant andmore icy sweat rolled in large drops from his forehead; his heartwas oppressed by a horrible anguish; his respiration was brokenand short.  And yet he said, to reassure himself, that thispavilion perhaps had nothing in common with Mme. Bonacieux; thatthe young woman had made an appointment with him before thepavilion, and not in the pavilion; that she might have beendetained in Paris by her duties, or perhaps by the jealousy ofher husband.

    But all these reasons were combated, destroyed, overthrown, bythat feeling of intimate pain which, on certain occasions, takespossession of our being, and cries to us so as to be understoodunmistakably that some great misfortune is hanging over us.Then D'Artagnan became almost wild.  He ran along the high road,took the path he had before taken, and reaching the ferry,interrogated the boatman.

    About seven o'clock in the evening, the boatman had taken over ayoung woman, wrapped in a black mantle, who appeared to be veryanxious not to be recognized; but entirely on account of herprecautions, the boatman had paid more attention to her anddiscovered that she was young and pretty.

    There were then, as now, a crowd of young and pretty women whocame to St. Cloud, and who had reasons for not being seen, andyet D'Artagnan did not for an instant doubt that it was Mme.Bonacieux whom the boatman had noticed.

    D'Artagnan took advantage of the lamp which burned in the cabinof the ferryman to read the billet of Mme. Bonacieux once again,and satisfy himself that he had not been mistaken, that theappointment was at St. Cloud and not elsewhere, before theD'Estrees's pavilion and not in another street.  Everythingconspired to prove to D'Artagnan that his presentiments had notdeceived him, and that a great misfortune had happened.He again ran back to the chateau.  It appeared to him thatsomething might have happened at the pavilion in his absence, andthat fresh information awaited him.  The lane was still deserted,and the same calm soft light shone through the window.D'Artagnan then thought of that cottage, silent and obscure,which had no doubt seen all, and could tell its tale.  The gateof the enclosure was shut; but he leaped over the hedge, and inspite of the barking of a chained-up dog, went up to the cabin.No one answered to his first knocking.  A silence of deathreigned in the cabin as in the pavilion; but as the cabin was hislast resource, he knocked again.

    It soon appeared to him that he heard a slight noise within--atimid noise which seemed to tremble lest it should be heard.Then D'Artagnan ceased knocking, and prayed with an accent sofull of anxiety and promises, terror and cajolery, that his voicewas of a nature to reassure the most fearful.  At length an old,worm-eaten shutter was opened, or rather pushed ajar, but closedagain as soon as the light from a miserable lamp which burned inthe corner had shone upon the baldric, sword belt, and pistolpommels of D'Artagnan.  Nevertheless, rapid as the movement hadbeen, D'Artagnan had had time to get a glimpse of the head of anold man.

    "In the name of heaven!" cried he, "listen to me; I have beenwaiting for someone who has not come.  I am dying with anxiety.Has anything particular happened in the neighborhood?  Speak!"The window was again opened slowly, and the same face appeared,only it was now still more pale than before.

    D'Artagnan related his story simply, with the omission of names.He told how he had a rendezvous with a young woman before thatpavilion, and how, not seeing her come, he had climbed the lindentree, and by the light of the lamp had seen the disorder of thechamber.

    The old man listened attentively, making a sign only that it wasall so; and then, when D'Artagnan had ended, he shook his headwith an air that announced nothing good.

    "What do you mean?" cried D'Artagnan.  "In the name of heaven,explain yourself!"

    "Oh!  Monsieur," said the old man, "ask me nothing; for if Idared tell you what I have seen, certainly no good would befallme."

    "You have, then, seen something?" replied D'Artagnan.  "In thatcase, in the name of heaven," continued he, throwing him apistole, "tell me what you have seen, and I will pledge you theword of a gentleman that not one of your words shall escape frommy heart."

    The old man read so much truth and so much grief in the face ofthe young man that he made him a sign to listen, and repeated ina low voice: "It was scarcely nine o'clock when I heard a noisein the street, and was wondering what it could be, when on comingto my door, I found that somebody was endeavoring to open it.  AsI am very poor and am not afraid of being robbed, I went andopened the gate and saw three men at a few paces from it.  In theshadow was a carriage with two horses, and some saddlehorses.These horses evidently belonged to the three men, who wee dressedas cavaliers.  'Ah, my worthy gentlemen,' cried I, 'what do youwant?'  'You must have a ladder?' said he who appeared to be theleader of the party.  'Yes, monsieur, the one with which I gathermy fruit.'  'Lend it to us, and go into your house again; thereis a crown for the annoyance we have caused you.  Only rememberthis--if you speak a word of what you may see or what you mayhear (for you will look and you will listen, I am quite sure,however we may threaten you), you are lost.'  At these words hethrew me a crown, which I picked up, and he took the ladder.After shutting the gate behind them, I pretended to return to thehouse, but I immediately went out a back door, and stealing alongin the shade of the hedge, I gained yonder clump of elder, fromwhich I could hear and see everything.  The three men brought thecarriage up quietly, and took out of it a little man, stout,short, elderly, and commonly dressed in clothes of a dark color,who ascended the ladder very carefully, looked suspiciously in atthe window of the pavilion, came down as quietly as he had goneup, and whispered, 'It is she!'  Immediately, he who had spokento me approached the door of the pavilion, opened it with a keyhe had in his hand, closed the door and disappeared, while at thesame time the other two men ascended the ladder.  The little oldman remained at the coach door; the coachman took care of hishorses, the lackey held the saddlehorses.  All at once greatcried resounded in the pavilion, and a woman came to the window,and opened it, as if to throw herself out of it; but as soon asshe perceived the other two men, she fell back and they went intothe chamber.  Then I saw no more; but I heard the noise ofbreaking furniture.  The woman screamed, and cried for help; buther cries were soon stifled.  Two of the men appeared, bearingthe woman in their arms, and carried her to the carriage, intowhich the little old man got after her.  The leader closed thewindow, came out an instant after by the door, and satisfiedhimself that the woman was in the carriage.  His two companionswere already on horseback.  He sprang into his saddle; the lackeytook his place by the coachman; the carriage went off at a quickpace, escorted by the three horsemen, and all was over.  Fromthat moment I have neither seen nor heard anything."D'Artagnan, entirely overcome by this terrible story, remainedmotionless and mute, while all the demons of anger and jealousywere howling in his heart.

    "But, my good gentleman," resumed the old man, upon whom thismute despair certainly produced a greater effect than cries andtears would have done, "do not take on so; they did not kill her,and that's a comfort."

    "Can you guess," said D'Artagnan, "who was the man who headedthis infernal expedition?"

    "I don't know him."

    "But as you spoke to him you must have seen him.""Oh, it's a description you want?"

    "Exactly so."

    "A tall, dark man, with black mustaches, dark eyes, and the airof a gentleman."

    "That's the man!" cried D'Artagnan, "again he, forever he!  He ismy demon, apparently.  And the other?"

    "Which?"

    "The short one."

    "Oh, he was not a gentleman, I'll answer for it; besides, he didnot wear a sword, and the others treated him with smallconsideration."

    "Some lackey," murmured D'Artagnan.  "Poor woman, poor woman,what have they done with you?"

    "You have promised to be secret, my good monsieur?" said the oldman.

    "And I renew my promise.  Be easy, I am a gentleman.  A gentlemanhas but his word, and I have given you mine."

    With a heavy heart, D'Artagnan again bent his way toward theferry.  Sometimes he hoped it could not be Mme. Bonacieux, andthat he should find her next day at the Louvre; sometimes hefeared she had had an intrigue with another, who, in a jealousfit, had surprised her and carried her off.  His mind was torn bydoubt, grief, and despair.

    "Oh, if I had my three friends here," cried he, "I should have,at least, some hopes of finding her; but who knows what hasbecome of them?"

    It was past midnight; the next thing was to find Planchet.D'Artagnan went successively into all the cabarets in which therewas a light, but could not find Planchet in any of them.At the sixth he began to reflect that the search was ratherdubious.  D'Artagnan had appointed six o'clock in the morning forhis lackey, and wherever he might be, he was right.Besides, it came into the young man's mind that by remaining inthe environs of the spot on which this sad event had passed, hewould, perhaps, have some light thrown upon the mysteriousaffair.  At the sixth cabaret, then, as we said, D'Artagnanstopped, asked for a bottle of wine of the best quality, andplacing himself in the darkest corner of the room, determinedthus to wait till daylight; but this time again his hopes weredisappointed, and although he listened with all his ears, heheard nothing, amid the oaths, coarse jokes, and abuse whichpassed between the laborers, servants, and carters who comprisedthe honorable society of which he formed a part, which could puthim upon the least track of her who had been stolen from him.  Hewas compelled, them, after having swallowed the contents of hisbottle, to pass the time as well as to evade suspicion, to fallinto the easiest position in his corner and to sleep, whetherwell or ill.  D'Artagnan, be it remembered, was only twenty yearsold, and at that age sleep has its imprescriptible rights whichit imperiously insists upon, even with the saddest hearts.Toward six o'clock D'Artagnan awoke with that uncomfortablefeeling which generally accompanies the break of day after a badnight.  He was not long in making his toilet.  He examinedhimself to see if advantage had been taken of his sleep, andhaving found his diamond ring on his finger, his purse in hispocket, and his pistols in his belt, he rose, paid for hisbottle, and went out to try if he could have any better luck inhis search after his lackey than he had had the night before.The first thing he perceived through the damp gray mist washonest Planchet, who, with the two horses in hand, awaited him atthe door of a little blind cabaret, before which D'Artagnan hadpassed without even a suspicion of its existence.

    25  PORTHOS

    Instead of returning directly home, D'Artagnan alighted at thedoor of M. de Treville, and ran quickly up the stairs.  This timehe had decided to relate all that had passed.  M. de Trevillewould doubtless give him good advice as to the whole affair.Besides, as M. de Treville saw the queen almost daily, he mightbe able to draw from her Majesty some intelligence of the pooryoung woman, whom they were doubtless making pay very dearly forher devotedness to her mistress.

    M. de Treville listened to the young man's account with aseriousness which proved that he saw something else in thisadventure besides a love affair.  When D'Artagnan had finished,he said, "Hum!  All this savors of his Eminence, a league off.""But what is to be done?" said D'Artagnan.

    "Nothing, absolutely nothing, at present, but quitting at Paris,as I told you, as soon as possible.  I will see the queen; I willrelate to her the details of the disappearance of this poorwoman, of which she is no doubt ignorant.  These details willguide her on her part, and on your return, I shall perhaps havesome good news to tell you.  Rely on me."

    D'Artagnan knew that, although a Gascon, M. de Treville was notin the habit of making promises, and that when by chance he didpromise, he more than kept his word.  He bowed to him, then, fullof gratitude for the past and for the future; and the worthycaptain, who on his side felt a lively interest in this youngman, so brave and so resolute, pressed his hand kindly, wishinghim a pleasant journey.

    Determined to put the advice of M. de Treville in practiceinstantly, D'Artagnan directed his course toward the Rue desFossoyeurs, in order to superintend the packing of his valise.On approaching the house, he perceived M. Bonacieux in morningcostume, standing at his threshold.  All that the prudentPlanchet had said to him the preceding evening about the sinistercharacter of the old man recurred to the mind of D'Artagnan, wholooked at him with more attention than he had done before.  Infact, in addition to that yellow, sickly paleness which indicatesthe insinuation of the bile in the blood, and which might,besides, be accidental, D'Artagnan remarked somethingperfidiously significant in the play of the wrinkled features ofhis countenance.  A rogue does not laugh in the same way that anhonest man does; a hypocrite does not shed the tears of a man ofgood faith.  All falsehood is a mask; and however well made themask may be, with a little attention we may always succeed indistinguishing it from the true face.

    It appeared, then, to D'Artagnan that M. Bonacieux wore a mask,and likewise that that mask was most disagreeable to look upon.In consequence of this feeling of repugnance, he was about topass without speaking to him, but, as he had done the day before,M. Bonacieux accosted him.

    "Well, young man," said he, "we appear to pass rather gay nights!Seven o'clock in the morning!  PESTE!  You seem to reverseordinary customs, and come home at the hour when other people aregoing out."

    "No one can reproach you for anything of the kind, MonsieurBonacieux," said the young man; "you are a model for regularpeople.  It is true that when a man possesses a young and prettywife, he has no need to seek happiness elsewhere.  Happinesscomes to meet him, does it not, Monsieur Bonacieux?"Bonacieux became as pale as death, and grinned a ghastly smile."Ah, ah!" said Bonacieux, "you are a jocular companion!  Butwhere the devil were you gladding last night, my young master?It does not appear to be very clean in the crossroads."D'Artagnan glanced down at his boots, all covered with mud; butthat same glance fell upon the shoes and stockings of the mercer,and it might have been said they had been dipped in the same mudheap.  Both were stained with splashes of mud of the sameappearance.

    Then a sudden idea crossed the mind of D'Artagnan.  That littlestout man, short and elderly, that sort of lackey, dressed indark clothes, treated without ceremony by the men wearing swordswho composed the escort, was Bonacieux himself.  The husband hadpresided at the abduction of his wife.

    A terrible inclination seized D'Artagnan to grasp the mercer bythe throat and strangle him; but, as we have said, he was a veryprudent youth, and he restrained himself.  However, therevolution which appeared upon his countenance was so visiblethat Bonacieux was terrified at it, and he endeavored to drawback a step or two; but as he was standing before the half of thedoor which was shut, the obstacle compelled him to keep hisplace.

    "Ah, but you are joking, my worthy man!" said D'Artagnan.  Itappears to me that if my boots need a sponge, your stockings andshoes stand in equal need of a brush.  May you not have beenphilandering a little also, Monsieur Bonacieux?  Oh, the devil!That's unpardonable in a man of your age, and who besides, hassuch a pretty wife as yours."

    "Oh, Lord! no," said Bonacieux, "but yesterday I went to St.Mande to make some inquiries after a servant, as I cannotpossibly do without one; and the roads were so bad that I broughtback all this mud, which I have not yet had time to remove."The place named by Bonacieux as that which had been the object ofhis journey was a fresh proof in support of the suspicionsD'Artagnan had conceived.  Bonacieux had named Mande becauseMande was in an exactly opposite direction from St. Cloud.  Thisprobability afforded him his first consolation.  If Bonacieuxknew where his wife was, one might, by extreme means, force themercer to open his teeth and let his secret escape.  Thequestion, then, was how to change this probability into acertainty.

    "Pardon, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, if I don't stand uponceremony," said D'Artagnan, "but nothing makes one so thirsty aswant of sleep.  I am parched with thirst.  Allow me to take aglass of water in your apartment; you know that is never refusedamong neighbors."

    Without waiting for the permission of his host, D'Artagnan wentquickly into the house, and cast a rapid glance at the bed.  Ithad not been used.  Bonacieux had not been abed.  He had onlybeen back an hour or two; he had accompanied his wife to theplace of her confinement, or else at least to the first relay."Thanks, Monsieur Bonacieux," said D'Artagnan, emptying hisglass, "that is all I wanted of you.  I will now go up into myapartment.  I will make Planchet brush my boots; and when he hasdone, I will, if you like, send him to you to brush your shoes."He left the mercer quite astonished at his singular farewell, andasking himself if he had not been a little inconsiderate.At the top of the stairs he found Planchet in a great fright."Ah, monsieur!" cried Planchet, as soon as he perceived hismaster, "here is more trouble.  I thought you would never comein."

    "What's the matter now, Planchet?" demanded D'Artagnan."Oh!  I give you a hundred, I give you a thousand times to guess,monsieur, the visit I received in your absence."

    "When?"

    "About half an hour ago, while you were at Monsieur deTreville's."

    "Who has been here?  Come, speak."

    "Monsieur de Cavois."

    "Monsieur de Cavois?"

    "In person."

    "The captain of the cardinal's Guards?"

    "Himself."

    "Did he come to arrest me?"

    "I have no doubt that he did, monsieur, for all his wheedlingmanner."

    "Was he so sweet, then?"

    "Indeed, he was all honey, monsieur."

    "Indeed!"

    "He came, he said, on the part of his Eminence, who wished youwell, and to beg you to follow him to the Palais-Royal."**It was called the Palais-Cardinal before Richelieu gave it tothe King.

    "What did you answer him?"

    "That the thing was impossible, seeing that you were not at home,as he could see."

    "Well, what did he say then?"

    "That you must not fail to call upon him in the course of theday; and then he added in a low voice, 'Tell your master that hisEminence is very well disposed toward him, and that his fortuneperhaps depends upon this interview.'"

    "The snare is rather MALADROIT for the cardinal," replied theyoung man, smiling.

    "Oh, I saw the snare, and I answered you would be quite indespair on your return.

    "'Where has he gone?' asked Monsieur de Cavois.

    "'To Troyes, in Champagne,' I answered.

    "'And when did he set out?'

    "'Yesterday evening.'"

    "Planchet, my friend," interrupted D'Artagnan, "you are really aprecious fellow."

    "You will understand, monsieur, I thought there would be stilltime, if you wish, to see Monsieur de Cavois to contradict me bysaying you were not yet gone.  The falsehood would then lie at mydoor, and as I am not a gentleman, I may be allowed to lie.""Be of good heart, Planchet, you shall preserve your reputationas a veracious man.  In a quarter of an hour we set off.""That's the advice I was about to give Monsieur; and where are wegoing, may I ask, without being too curious?"

    "PARDIEU!  In the opposite direction to that which you said I wasgone.  Besides, are you not as anxious to learn news of Grimaud,Mousqueton, and Bazin as I am to know what has become of Athos,Porthos, and Aramis?"

    "Yes, monsieur," said Planchet, "and I will go as soon as youplease.  Indeed, I think provincial air will suit us much betterjust now than the air of Paris.  So then--"

    "So then, pack up our luggage, Planchet, and let us be off.  Onmy part, I will go out with my hands in my pockets, that nothingmay be suspected.  You may join me at the Hotel des Gardes.  Bythe way, Planchet, I think you are right with respect to ourhost, and that he is decidedly a frightfully low wretch.""Ah, monsieur, you may take my word when I tell you anything.  Iam a physiognomist, I assure you."

    D'Artagnan went out first, as had been agreed upon.  Then, inorder that he might have nothing to reproach himself with, hedirected his steps, for the last time, toward the residences ofhis three friends.  No news had been received of them; only aletter, all perfumed and of an elegant writing in smallcharacters, had come for Aramis.  D'Artagnan took charge of it.Ten minutes afterward Planchet joined him at the stables of theHotel des Gardes.  D'Artagnan, in order that there might be notime lost, had saddled his horse himself.

    "That's well," said he to Planchet, when the latter added theportmanteau to the equipment.  "Now saddle the other threehorses."

    "Do you think, then, monsieur, that we shall travel faster withtwo horses apiece?" said Planchet, with his shrewd air."No, Monsieur Jester," replied D'Artagnan; "but with our fourhorses we may bring back our three friends, if we should have thegood fortune to find them living."

    "Which is a great chance," replied Planchet, "but we must notdespair of the mercy of God."

    "Amen!" said D'Artagnan, getting into his saddle.As they went from the Hotel des Gardes, they separated, leavingthe street at opposite ends,  one having to quit Paris by theBarriere de la Villette and the other by the Barriere Montmartre,to meet again beyond St. Denis--a strategic maneuver which,having been executed with equal punctuality, was crowned with themost fortunate results.  D'Artagnan and Planchet enteredPierrefitte together.

    Planchet was more courageous, it must be admitted, by day than bynight.  His natural prudence, however, never forsook him for asingle instant.  He had forgotten not one of the incidents of thefirst journey, and he looked upon everybody he met on the road asan enemy.  It followed that his hat was forever in his hand,which procured him some severe reprimands from D'Artagnan, whofeared that his excess of politeness would lead people to thinkhe was the lackey of a man of no consequence.

    Nevertheless, whether the passengers were really touched by theurbanity of Planchet or whether this time nobody was posted onthe young man's road, our two travelers arrived at Chantillywithout any accident, and alighted at the tavern of Great St.Martin, the same at which they had stopped on their firstjourney.

    The host, on seeing a young man followed by a lackey with twoextra horses, advanced respectfully to the door.  Now, as theyhad already traveled eleven leagues, D'Artagnan thought it timeto stop, whether Porthos were or were not in the inn.  Perhaps itwould not be prudent to ask at once what had become of theMusketeer.  The result of these reflections was that D'Artagnan,without asking information of any kind, alighted, commended thehorses to the care of his lackey, entered a small room destinedto receive those who wished to be alone, and desired the host tobring him a bottle of his best wine and as good a breakfast aspossible--a desire which further corroborated the high opinionthe innkeeper had formed of the traveler at first sight.D'Artagnan was therefore served with miraculous celerity.  Theregiment of the Guards was recruited among the first gentlemen ofthe kingdom; and D'Artagnan, followed by a lackey, and travelingwith four magnificent horses, despite the simplicity of hisuniform, could not fail to make a sensation.  The host desiredhimself to serve him; which D'Artagnan perceiving, ordered twoglasses to be brought, and commenced the following conversation."My faith, my good host," said D'Artagnan, filling the twoglasses, "I asked for a bottle of your best wine, and if you havedeceived me, you will be punished in what you have sinned; forseeing that I hate drinking my myself, you shall drink with me.Take your glass, then, and let us drink.  But what shall we drinkto, so as to avoid wounding any susceptibility?  Let us drink tothe prosperity of your establishment."

    "Your Lordship does me much honor," said the host, "and I thankyou sincerely for your kind wish."

    "But don't mistake," said D'Artagnan, "there is more selfishnessin my toast than perhaps you may think--for it is only inprosperous establishments that one is well received.  In hotelsthat do not flourish, everything is in confusion, and thetraveler is a victim to the embarrassments of his host.  Now, Itravel a great deal, particularly on this road, and I wish to seeall innkeepers making a fortune."

    "It seems to me," said the host, "that this is not the first timeI have had the honor of seeing Monsieur."

    "Bah, I have passed perhaps ten times through Chantilly, and outof the ten times I have stopped three or four times at your houseat least.  Why I was here only ten or twelve days ago.  I wasconducting some friends, Musketeers, one of whom, by the by, hada dispute with a stranger--a man who sought a quarrel with him,for I don't know what."

    "Exactly so," said the host; "I remember it perfectly.  It is notMonsieur Porthos that your Lordship means?"

    "Yes, that is my companion's name.  My God, my dear host, tell meif anything has happened to him?"

    "Your Lordship must have observed that he could not continue hisjourney."

    "Why, to be sure, he promised to rejoin us, and we have seennothing of him."

    "He has done us the honor to remain here."

    "What, he had done you the honor to remain here?""Yes, monsieur, in this house; and we are even a little uneasy--""On what account?"

    "Of certain expenses he has contracted."

    "Well, but whatever expenses he may have incurred, I am sure heis in a condition to pay them."

    "Ah, monsieur, you infuse genuine balm into my blood.  We havemade considerable advances; and this very morning the surgeondeclared that if Monsieur Porthos did not pay him, he should lookto me, as it was I who had sent for him."

    "Porthos is wounded, then?"

    "I cannot tell you, monsieur."

    "What!  You cannot tell me?  Surely you ought to be able to tellme better than any other person."

    "Yes; but in our situation we must not say all we know--particularly as we have been warned that our ears should answerfor our tongues."

    "Well, can I see Porthos?"

    "Certainly, monsieur.  Take the stairs on your right; go up thefirst flight and knock at Number One.  Only warn him that it isyou."

    "Why should I do that?"

    "Because, monsieur, some mischief might happen to you.""Of what kind, in the name of wonder?"

    "Monsieur Porthos may imagine you belong to the house, and in afit of passion might run his sword through you or blow out yourbrains."

    "What have you done to him, then?"

    "We have asked him for money."

    "The devil!  Ah, I can understand that.  It is a demand thatPorthos takes very ill when he is not in funds; but I know hemust be so at present."

    "We thought so, too, monsieur.  As our house is carried on veryregularly, and we make out our bills every week, at the end ofeight days we presented our account; but it appeared we hadchosen an unlucky moment, for at the first word on the subject,he sent us to all the devils.  It is true he had been playing theday before."

    "Playing the day before!  And with whom?"

    "Lord, who can say, monsieur?  With some gentleman who wastraveling this way, to whom he proposed a game of LANSQUENET.""That's it, then, and the foolish fellow lost all he had?""Even to his horse, monsieur; for when the gentleman was about toset out, we perceived that his lackey was saddling MonsieurPorthos's horse, as well as his master's.  When we observed thisto him, he told us all to trouble ourselves about our ownbusiness, as this horse belonged to him.  We also informedMonsieur Porthos of what was going on; but he told us we werescoundrels to doubt a gentleman's word, and that as he had saidthe horse was his, it must be so."

    "That's Porthos all over," murmured D'Artagnan.

    "Then," continued the host, "I replied that as from the moment weseemed not likely to come to a good understanding with respect topayment, I hoped that he would have at least the kindness togrant the favor of his custom to my brother host of the GoldenEagle; but Monsieur Porthos replied that, my house being thebest, he should remain where he was.  This reply was tooflattering to allow me to insist on his departure.  I confinedmyself then to begging him to give up his chamber, which is thehandsomest in the hotel, and to be satisfied with a pretty littleroom on the third floor; but to this Monsieur Porthos  repliedthat as he every moment expected his mistress, who was one of thegreatest ladies in the court, I might easily comprehend that thechamber he did me the honor to occupy in my house was itself verymean for the visit of such a personage.  Nevertheless, whileacknowledging the truth of what he said, I thought proper toinsist; but without even giving himself the trouble to enter intoany discussion with me, he took one of his pistols, laid it onhis table, day and night, and said that at the first word thatshould be spoken to him about removing, either within the houseor our of it, he would blow out the brains of the person whoshould be so imprudent as to meddle with a matter which onlyconcerned himself.  Since that time, monsieur, nobody enter hischamber but his servant."

    "What!  Mousqueton is here, then?"

    "Oh, yes, monsieur.  Five days after your departure, he cameback, and in a very bad condition, too.  It appears that he hadmet with disagreeables, likewise, on his journey.  Unfortunately,he is more nimble than his master; so that for the sake of hismaster, he puts us all under his feet, and as he thinks we mightrefuse what he asked for, he takes all he wants without asking atall."

    "The fact is," said D'Artagnan, "I have always observed a greatdegree of intelligence and devotedness in Mousqueton.""That is possible, monsieur; but suppose I should happen to bebrought in contact, even four times a year, with suchintelligence and devotedness--why, I should be a ruined man!""No, for Porthos will pay you."

    "Hum!" said the host, in a doubtful tone.

    "The favorite of a great lady will not be allowed to beinconvenienced for such a paltry sum as he owes you.""If I durst say what I believe on that head--"

    "What you believe?"

    "I ought rather to say, what I know."

    "What you know?"

    "And even what I am sure of."

    "And of what are you so sure?"

    "I would say that I know this great lady."

    "You?"

    "Yes; I."

    "And how do you know her?"

    "Oh, monsieur, if I could believe I might trust in yourdiscretion."

    "Speak!  By the word of a gentleman, you shall have no cause torepent of your confidence."

    "Well, monsieur, you understand that uneasiness makes us do manythings."

    "What have you done?"

    "Oh, nothing which was not right in the character of a creditor.""Well?"

    "Monsieur Porthos gave us a note for his duchess, ordering us toput it in the post.  This was before his servant came.  As hecould not leave his chamber, it was necessary to charge us withthis commission."

    "And then?"

    "Instead of putting the letter in the post, which is never safe,I took advantage of the journey of one of my lads to Paris, andordered him to convey the letter to this duchess himself.  Thiswas fulfilling the intentions of Monsieur Porthos, who haddesired us to be so careful of this letter, was it not?""Nearly so."

    "Well, monsieur, do you know who this great lady is?""No; I have heard Porthos speak of her, that's all.""Do you know who this pretended duchess is?

    "I repeat to you, I don't know her."

    "Why, she is the old wife of a procurator* of the Chatelet,monsieur, named Madame Coquenard, who, although she is at leastfifty, still gives herself jealous airs.  It struck me as veryodd that a princess should live in the Rue aux Ours."*Attorney

    "But how do you know all this?"

    "Because she flew into a great passion on receiving the letter,saying that Monsieur Porthos was a weathercock, and that she wassure it was for some woman he had received this wound.""Has he been wounded, then?"

    "Oh, good Lord!  What have I said?"

    "You said that Porthos had received a sword cut.""Yes, but he has forbidden me so strictly to say so.""And why so."

    "Zounds, monsieur!  Because he had boasted that he wouldperforate the stranger with whom you left him in dispute; whereasthe stranger, on the contrary, in spite of all his rodomontadesquickly threw him on his back.  As Monsieur Porthos is a veryboastful man, he insists that nobody shall know he has receivedthis wound except the duchess, whom he endeavored to interest byan account of his adventure."

    "It is a wound that confines him to his bed?"

    "Ah, and a master stroke, too, I assure you.  Your friend's soulmust stick tight to his body."

    "Were you there, then?"

    "Monsieur, I followed them from curiosity, so that I saw thecombat without the combatants seeing me."

    "And what took place?"

    "Oh!  The affair was not long, I assure you.  They placedthemselves on guard; the stranger made a feint and a lunge, andthat so rapidly that when Monsieur Porthos came to the PARADE, hehad already three inches of steel in his breast.  He immediatelyfell backward.  The stranger placed the point of his sword at histhroat; and Monsieur Porthos, finding himself at the mercy of hisadversary, acknowledged himself conquered.  Upon which thestranger asked his name, and learning that it was Porthos, andnot D'Artagnan, he assisted him to rise, brought him back to thehotel, mounted his horse, and disappeared."

    "So it was with Monsieur D'Artagnan this stranger meant toquarrel?"

    "It appears so."

    "And do you know what has become of him?"

    "No, I never saw him until that moment, and have not seen himsince."

    "Very well; I know all that I wish to know.  Porthos's chamberis, you say, on the first story, Number One?"

    "Yes, monsieur, the handsomest in the inn--a chamber that I couldhave let ten times over."

    "Bah!  Be satisfied," said D'Artagnan, laughing, "Porthos willpay you with the money of the Duchess Coquenard.""Oh, monsieur, procurator's wife or duchess, if she will butloosen her pursestrings, it will be all the same; but shepositively answered that she was tired of the exigencies andinfidelities of Monsieur Porthos, and that she would not send hima denier."

    "And did you convey this answer to your guest?"

    "We took good care not to do that; he would have found in whatfashion we had executed his commission."

    "So that he still expects his money?"

    "Oh, Lord, yes, monsieur!  Yesterday he wrote again; but it washis servant who this time put the letter in the post.""Do you say the procurator's wife is old and ugly?""Fifty at least, monsieur, and not at all handsome, according toPathaud's account."

    "In that case, you may be quite at ease; she will soon besoftened.  Besides, Porthos cannot owe you much.""How, not much!  Twenty good pistoles, already, without reckoningthe doctor.  He denies himself nothing; it may easily be seen hehas been accustomed to live well."

    "Never mind; if his mistress abandons him, he will find friends,I will answer for it.  So, my dear host, be not uneasy, andcontinue to take all the care of him that his situationrequires."

    "Monsieur has promised me not to open his mouth about theprocurator's wife, and not to say a word of the wound?""That's agreed; you have my word."

    "Oh, he would kill me!"

    "Don't be afraid; he is not so much of a devil as he appears."Saying these words, D'Artagnan went upstairs, leaving his host alittle better satisfied with respect to two things in which heappeared to be very much interested--his debt and his life.At the top of the stairs, upon the most conspicuous door of thecorridor, was traced in black ink a gigantic number "1."D'Artagnan knocked, and upon the bidding to come in which camefrom inside, he entered the chamber.

    Porthos was in bed, and was playing a game at LANSQUENET withMousqueton, to keep his hand in; while a spit loaded withpartridges was turning before the fire, and on each side of alarge chimneypiece, over two chafing dishes, were boiling twostewpans, from which exhaled a double odor of rabbit and fishstews, rejoicing to the smell.  In addition to this he perceivedthat the top of a wardrobe and the marble of a commode werecovered with empty bottles.

    At the sight of his friend, Porthos uttered a loud cry of joy;and Mousqueton, rising respectfully, yielded his place to him,and went to give an eye to the two stewpans, of which he appearedto have the particular inspection.

    "Ah, PARDIEU!  Is that you?" said Porthos to D'Artagnan.  "Youare right welcome.  Excuse my not coming to meet you; but," addedhe, looking at D'Artagnan with a certain degree of uneasiness,"you know what has happened to me?"

    "No."

    "Has the host told you nothing, then?"

    "I asked after you, and came up as soon as I could."Porthos seemed to breathe more freely.

    "And what has happened to you, my dear Porthos?" continuedD'Artagnan.

    "Why, on making a thrust at my adversary, whom I had already hitthree times, and whom I meant to finish with the fourth, I put myfoot on a stone, slipped, and strained my knee."

    "Truly?"

    "Honor!  Luckily for the rascal, for I should have left him deadon the spot, I assure you."

    "And what has became of him?"

    "Oh, I don't know; he had enough, and set off without waiting forthe rest.  But you, my dear D'Artagnan, what has happened toyou?"

    "So that this strain of the knee," continued D'Artagnan, "my dearPorthos, keeps you in bed?"

    "My God, that's all.  I shall be about again in a few days.""Why did you not have yourself conveyed to Paris?  You must becruelly bored here."

    "That was my intention; but, my dear friend, I have one thing toconfess to you."

    "What's that?"

    "It is that as I was cruelly bored, as you say, and as I had theseventy-five pistoles in my pocket which you had distributed tome, in order to amuse myself I invited a gentleman who wastraveling this way to walk up, and proposed a cast of dice.  Heaccepted my challenge, and, my faith, my seventy-five pistolespassed from my pocket to his, without reckoning my horse, whichhe won into the bargain.  But you, my dear D'Artagnan?""What can you expect, my dear Porthos; a man is not privileged inall ways," said D'Artagnan.  "You know the proverb 'Unlucky atplay, lucky in love.'  You are too fortunate in your love forplay not to take its revenge.  What consequence can the reversesof fortune be to you?  Have you not, happy rogue that you are--have you not your duchess, who cannot fail to come to your aid?""Well, you see, my dear D'Artagnan, with what ill luck I play,"replied Porthos, with the most careless air in the world.  "Iwrote to her to send me fifty louis or so, of which I stoodabsolutely in need on account of my accident."

    "Well?"

    "Well, she must be at her country seat, for she has not answeredme."

    "Truly?"

    "No; so I yesterday addressed another epistle to her, still morepressing than the first.  But you are here, my dear fellow, letus speak of you.  I confess I began to be very uneasy on youraccount."

    "But your host behaves very well toward you, as it appears, mydear Porthos," said D'Artagnan, directing the sick man'sattention to the full stewpans and the empty bottles."So, so," replied Porthos.  "Only three or four days ago theimpertinent jackanapes gave me his bill, and I was forced to turnboth him and his bill out of the door; so that I am heresomething in the fashion of a conqueror, holding my position, asit were, my conquest.  So you see, being in constant fear ofbeing forced from that position, I am armed to the teeth.""And yet," said D'Artagnan, laughing, "it appears to me that fromtime to time you must make SORTIES."  And he again pointed to thebottles and the stewpans.

    "Not I, unfortunately!" said Porthos.  "This miserable strainconfines me to my bed; but Mousqueton forages, and brings inprovisions.  Friend Mousqueton, you see that we have areinforcement, and we must have an increase of supplies.""Mousqueton," said D'Artagnan, "you must render me a service.""What, monsieur?"

    "You must give your recipe to Planchet.  I may be besieged in myturn, and I shall not be sorry for him to be able to let me enjoythe same advantages with which you gratify your master.""Lord, monsieur!  There is nothing more easy," said Mousqueton,with a modest air.  "One only needs to be sharp, that's all.  Iwas brought up in the country, and my father in his leisure timewas something of a poacher."

    "And what did he do the rest of his time?"

    "Monsieur, he carried on a trade which I have always thoughtsatisfactory."

    "Which?"

    "As it was a time of war between the Catholics and the Huguenots,and as he saw the Catholics exterminate the Huguenots and theHuguenots exterminate the Catholics--all in the name ofreligion--he adopted a mixed belief which permitted him to besometimes Catholic, sometimes a Huguenot.  Now, he was accustomedto walk with his fowling piece on his shoulder, behind the hedgeswhich border the roads, and when he saw a Catholic coming alone,the Protestant religion immediately prevailed in his mind.  Helowered his gun in the direction of the traveler; then, when hewas within ten paces of him, he commenced a conversation whichalmost always ended by the traveler's abandoning his purse tosave his life.  It goes without saying that when he saw aHuguenot coming, he felt himself filled with such ardent Catholiczeal that he could not understand how, a quarter of an hourbefore, he had been able to have any doubts upon the superiorityof our holy religion.  For my part, monsieur, I am Catholic--myfather, faithful to his principles, having made my elder brothera Huguenot."

    "And what was the end of this worthy man?" asked D'Artagnan."Oh, of the most unfortunate kind, monsieur.  One day he wassurprised in a lonely road between a Huguenot and a Catholic,with both of whom he had before had business, and who both knewhim again; so they united against him and hanged him on a tree.Then they came and boasted of their fine exploit in the cabaretof the next village, where my brother and I were drinking.""And what did you do?" said D'Artagnan.

    "We let them tell their story out," replied Mousqueton.  "Then,as in leaving the cabaret they took different directions, mybrother went and hid himself on the road of the Catholic, and Ion that of the Huguenot.  Two hours after, all was over; we haddone the business of both, admiring the foresight of our poorfather, who had taken the precaution to bring each of us up in adifferent religion."

    "Well, I must allow, as you say, your father was a veryintelligent fellow.  And you say in his leisure moments theworthy man was a poacher?"

    "Yes, monsieur, and it was he who taught me to lay a snare andground a line.  The consequence is that when I saw our laborers,which did not at all suit two such delicate stomachs as ours, Ihad recourse to a little of my old trade.  While walking near thewood of Monsieur le Prince, I laid a few snare in the runs; andwhile reclining on the banks of his Highness's pieces of water, Islipped a few lines into his fish ponds.  So that now, thanks beto God, we do not want, as Monsieur can testify, for partridges,rabbits, carp or eels--all light, wholesome food, suitable forthe sick."

    "But the wine," said D'Artagnan, "who furnishes the wine?  Yourhost?"

    "That is to say, yes and no."

    "How yes and no?"

    "He furnishes it, it is true, but he does not know that he hasthat honor."

    "Explain yourself, Mousqueton; your conversation is full ofinstructive things."

    "That is it, monsieur.  It has so chanced that I met with aSpaniard in my peregrinations who had seen many countries, andamong them the New World."

    "What connection can the New World have with the bottles whichare on the commode and the wardrobe?"

    "Patience, monsieur, everything will come in its turn.""This Spaniard had in his service a lackey who had accompaniedhim in his voyage to Mexico.  This lackey was my compatriot; andwe became the more intimate from there being many resemblances ofcharacter between us.  We loved sporting of all kinds better thananything; so that he related to me how in the plains of thePampas the natives hunt the tiger and the wild bull with simplerunning nooses which they throw to a distance of twenty or thirtypaves the end of a cord with such nicety; but in face of theproof I was obliged to acknowledge the truth of the recital.  Myfriend placed a bottle at the distance of thirty paces, and ateach cast he caught the neck of the bottle in his running noose.I practiced this exercise, and as nature has endowed me with somefaculties, at this day I can throw the lasso with any man in theworld.  Well, do you understand, monsieur?  Our host has a well-furnished cellar the key of which never leaves him; only thiscellar has a ventilating hole.  Now  through this ventilatinghole I throw my lasso, and as I now know in which part of thecellar is the best wine, that's my point for sport.  You see,monsieur, what the New World has to do with the bottles which areon the commode and the wardrobe.  Now, will you taste our wine,and without prejudice say what you think of it?"

    "Thank you, my friend, thank you; unfortunately, I have justbreakfasted."

    "Well," said Porthos, "arrange the table, Mousequeton, and whilewe breakfast, D'Artagnan will relate to us what has happened tohim during the ten days since he left us."

    "Willingly," said D'Artagnan.

    While Porthos and Mousqueton were breakfasting, with theappetites of convalescents and with that brotherly cordialitywhich unites men in misfortune, D'Artagnan related how Aramis,being wounded, was obliged to stop at Crevecoeur, how he had leftAthos fighting at Amiens with four men who accused him of being acoiner, and how he, D'Artagnan, had been forced to run the Comtesde Wardes through the body in order to reach England.But there the confidence of D'Artagnan stopped.  He only addedthat on his return from Great Britain he had brought back fourmagnificent horses--one for himself, and one for each of hiscompanions; then he informed Porthos that the one intended forhim was already installed in the stable of the tavern.At this moment Planchet entered, to inform his master that thehorses were sufficiently refreshed and that it would be possibleto sleep at Clermont.

    As D'Artagnan was tolerably reassured with regard to Porthos, andas he was anxious to obtain news of his two other friends, heheld out his hand to the wounded man, and told him he was aboutto resume his route in order to continue his researches.  For therest, as he reckoned upon returning by the same route in seven oreight days, if Porthos were still at the Great St. Martin, hewould call for him on his way.

    Porthos replied that in all probability his sprain would notpermit him to depart yet awhile.  Besides, it was necessary heshould stay at Chantilly to wait for the answer from his duchess.D'Artagnan wished that answer might be prompt and favorable; andhaving again recommended Porthos to the care of Mousqueton, andpaid his bill to the host, he resumed his route with Planchet,already relieved of one of his led horses.

    26  ARAMIS AND HIS THESIS

    D'Artagnan had said nothing to Porthos of his wound or of hisprocurator's wife.  Our Bernais was a prudent lad, however younghe might be.  Consequently he had appeared to believe all thatthe vainglorious Musketeer had told him, convinced that nofriendship will hold out against a surprised secret.  Besides, wefeel always a sort of mental superiority over those whose liveswe know better than they suppose.  In his projects of intriguefor the future, and determined as he was to make his threefriends the instruments of his fortune, D'Artagnan was not sorryat getting into his grasp beforehand the invisible strings bywhich he reckoned upon moving them.

    And yet, as he journeyed along, a profound sadness weighed uponhis heart.  He thought of that young and pretty Mme. Bonacieuxwho was to have paid him the price of his devotedness; but let ushasten to say that this sadness possessed the young man less fromthe regret of the happiness he had missed, than from the fear heentertained that some serious misfortune had befallen the poorwoman.  For himself, he had no doubt she was a victim of thecardinal's vengeance; and, and as was well known, the vengeanceof his Eminence was terrible.  How he had found grace in the eyesf the minister, he did not know; but without doubt M. de Cavoiswould have revealed this to him if the captain of the Guards hadfound him at home.

    Nothing makes time pass more quickly or more shortens a journeythan a thought which absorbs in itself all the faculties of theorganization of him who thinks.  External existence thenresembles a sleep of which this thought is the dream.  By itsinfluence, time has no longer measure, space has no longerdistance.  We depart from one place, and arrive at another, thatis all.  Of the interval passed, nothing remains in the memorybut a vague mist in which a thousand confused images of trees,mountains, and landscapes are lost.  It was as a prey to thishallucination that D'Artagnan traveled, at whatever pace hishorse pleased, the six or eight leagues that separated Chantillyfrom Crevecoeur, without his being able to remember on hisarrival in the village any of the things he had passed or metwith on the road.

    There only his memory returned to him.  He shook his head,perceived the cabaret at which he had left Aramis, and puttinghis horse to the trot, he shortly pulled up at the door.This time is was not a host but a hostess who received him.D'Artagnan was a physiognomist.  His eye took in at a glance theplump, cheerful countenance of the mistress of the place, and heat once perceived there was no occasion for dissembling with her,or of fearing anything from one blessed with such a joyousphysiognomy.

    "My good dame," asked D'Artagnan, "can you tell me what hasbecome of one of my friends, whom we were obliged to leave hereabout a dozen days ago?"

    "A handsome young man, three- or four-and-twenty years old, mild,amiable, and well made?"

    "That is he--wounded in the shoulder."

    "Just so.  Well, monsieur, he is still here."

    "Ah, PARDIEU!  My dear dame," said D'Artagnan, springing from hishorse, and throwing the bridle to Planchet, "you restore me tolife; where is this dear Aramis?  Let me embrace him, I am in ahurry to see him again."

    "Pardon, monsieur, but I doubt whether he can see you at thismoment."

    "Why so?  Has he a lady with him?"

    "Jesus!  What do you mean by that?  Poor lad!  No, monsieur, hehas not a lady with him."

    "With whom is he, then?"

    "With the curate of Montdidier and the superior of the Jesuits ofAmiens."

    "Good heavens!" cried D'Artagnan, "is the poor fellow worse,then?"

    "No, monsieur, quite the contrary; but after his illness gracetouched him, and he determined to take orders."

    "That's it!" said D'Artagnan, "I had forgotten that he was only aMusketeer for a time."

    "Monsieur still insists upon seeing him?"

    "More than ever."

    "Well, monsieur has only to take the right-hand staircase in thecourtyard, and knock at Number Five on the second floor."D'Artagnan walked quickly in the direction indicated, and foundone of those exterior staircases that are still to be seen in theyards of our old-fashioned taverns.  But there was no getting atthe place of sojourn of the future abbe; the defiles of thechamber of Aramis were as well guarded as the gardens of Armida.Bazin was stationed in the corridor, and barred his passage withthe more intrepidity that, after many years of trial, Bazin foundhimself near a result of which he had ever been ambitious.In fact, the dream of poor Bazin had always been to serve achurchman; and he awaited with impatience the moment, always inthe future, when Aramis would throw aside the uniform and assumethe cassock.  The daily-renewed promise of the young man that themoment would not long be delayed, had alone kept him in theservice of a Musketeer--a service in which, he said, his soul wasin constant jeopardy.

    Bazin was then at the height of joy.  In all probability, thistime his master would not retract.  The union of physical painwith moral uneasiness had produced the effect so long desired.Aramis, suffering at once in body and mind, had at length fixedhis eyes and his thoughts upon religion, and he had considered asa warning from heaven the double accident which had happened tohim; that is to say, the sudden disappearance of his mistress andthe wound in his shoulder.

    It may be easily understood that in the present disposition ofhis master nothing could be more disagreeable to Bazin than thearrival of D'Artagnan, which might cast his master back againinto that vortex of mundane affairs which had so long carried himaway.  He resolved, then, to defend the door bravely; and as,betrayed by the mistress of the inn, he could not say that Aramiswas absent, he endeavored to prove to the newcomer that it wouldbe the height of indiscretion to disturb his master in his piousconference, which had commenced with the morning and would not,as Bazin said, terminate before night.

    But D'Artagnan took very little heed of the eloquent discourse ofM. Bazin; and as he had no desire to support a polemic discussionwith his friend's valet, he simply moved him out of the way withone hand, and with the other turned the handle of the door ofNumber Five.  The door opened, and D'Artagnan went into thechamber.

    Aramis, in a black gown, his head enveloped in a sort of roundflat cap, not much unlike a CALOTTE, was seated before an oblongtable, covered with rolls of paper and enormous volumes in folio.At his right hand was placed the superior of the Jesuits, and onhis left the curate of Montdidier.  The curtains were half drawn,and only admitted the mysterious light calculated for beatificreveries.  All the mundane objects that generally strike the eyeon entering the room of a young man, particularly when that youngman is a Musketeer, had disappeared as if by enchantment; and forfear, no doubt, that the sight of them might bring his masterback to ideas of this world, Bazin had laid his hands upon sword,pistols, plumed hat, and embroideries and laces of all kinds andsorts.  In their stead D'Artagnan thought he perceived in anobscure corner a discipline cord suspended from a nail in thewall.

    At the noise made by D'Artagnan in entering, Aramis lifted up hishead, and beheld his friend; but to the great astonishment of theyoung man, the sight of him did not produce much effect upon theMusketeer, so completely was his mind detached from the things ofthis world.

    "Good day, dear D'Artagnan," said Aramis; "believe me, I am gladto see you."

    "So am I delighted to see you," said D'Artagnan, "although I amnot yet sure that it is Aramis I am speaking to.""To himself, my friend, to himself!  But what makes you doubtit?"

    "I was afraid I had made a mistake in the chamber, and that I hadfound my way into the apartment of some churchman.  Then anothererror seized me on seeing you in company with these gentlemen--Iwas afraid you were dangerously ill."

    The two men in black, who guessed D'Artagnan's meaning, darted athim a glance which might have been thought threatening; butD'Artagnan took no heed of it.

    "I disturb you, perhaps, my dear Aramis," continued D'Artagnan,"for by what I see, I am led to believe that you are confessingto these gentlemen."

    Aramis colored imperceptibly.  "You disturb me?  Oh, quite thecontrary, dear friend, I swear; and as a proof of what I say,permit me to declare I am rejoiced to see you safe and sound.""Ah, he'll come round," thought D'Artagnan; "that's not bad!""This gentleman, who is my friend, has just escaped from aserious danger," continued Aramis, with unction, pointing toD'Artagnan with his hand, and addressing the two ecclesiastics."Praise God, monsieur," replied they, bowing together."I have not failed to do so, your Reverences," replied the youngman, returning their salutation.

    "You arrive in good time, dear D'Artagnan," said Aramis, "and bytaking part in our discussion may assist us with yourintelligence.  Monsieur the Principal of Amiens, Monsieur theCurate of Montdidier, and I are arguing certain theologicalquestions in which we have been much interested; I shall bedelighted to have your opinion."

    "The opinion of a swordsman can have very little weight," repliedD'Artagnan, who began to be uneasy at the turn things weretaking, "and you had better be satisfied, believe me, with theknowledge of these gentlemen."

    The two men in black bowed in their turn.

    "On the contrary," replied Aramis, "your opinion will be veryvaluable.  The question is this:  Monsieur the Principal thinksthat my thesis ought to be dogmatic and didactic.""Your thesis!  Are you then making a thesis?"

    "Without doubt," replied the Jesuit.  "In the examination whichprecedes ordination, a thesis is always a requisite.""Ordination!" cried D'Artagnan, who could not believe what thehostess and Bazin had successively told him; and he gazed, halfstupefied, upon the three persons before him.

    "Now," continued Aramis, taking the same graceful position in hiseasy chair that he would have assumed in bed, and complacentlyexamining his hand, which was as white and plump as that of awoman, and which he held in the air to cause the blood todescend, "now, as you have heard, D'Artagnan, Monsieur thePrincipal is desirous that my thesis should be dogmatic, while I,for my part, would rather it should be ideal.  This is the reasonwhy Monsieur the Principal has proposed to me the followingsubject, which has not yet been treated upon, and in which Iperceive there is matter for magnificent elaboration-'UTRAQUEMANUS IN BENEDICENDO CLERICIS INFERIORIBUS NECESSARIA EST.'"D'Artagnan, whose erudition we are well acquainted with, evincedno more interest on hearing this quotation than he had at that ofM. de Treville in allusion to the gifts he pretended thatD'Artagnan had received from the Duke of Buckingham."Which means," resumed Aramis, that he might perfectlyunderstand, "'The two hands are indispensable for priests of theinferior orders, when they bestow the benediction.'""An admirable subject!" cried the Jesuit.

    "Admirable and dogmatic!" repeated the curate, who, about asstrong as D'Artagnan with respect to Latin, carefully watched theJesuit in order to keep step with him, and repeated his wordslike an echo.

    As to D'Artagnan, he remained perfectly insensible to theenthusiasm of the two men in black.

    "Yes, admirable!  PRORSUS ADMIRABILE!" continued Aramis; "butwhich requires a profound study of both the Scriptures and theFathers.  Now, I have confessed to these learned ecclesiastics,and that in all humility, that the duties of mounting guard andthe service of the king have caused me to neglect study a little.I should find myself, therefore, more at my ease, FACILUS NATANS,in a subject of my own choice, which would be to these hardtheological questions what morals are to metaphysics inphilosophy."

    D'Artagnan began to be tired, and so did the curate."See what an exordium!" cried the Jesuit.

    "Exordium," repeated the curate, for the sake of sayingsomething.  "QUEMADMODUM INTER COELORUM IMMENSITATEM."Aramis cast a glance upon D'Artagnan to see what effect all thisproduced, and found his friend gaping enough to split his jaws."Let us speak French, my father," said he to the Jesuit;"Monsieur D'Artagnan will enjoy our conversation better.""Yes," replied D'Artagnan; "I am fatigued with reading, and allthis Latin confuses me."

    "Certainly," replied the Jesuit, a little put out, while thecurate, greatly delighted, turned upon D'Artagnan a look full ofgratitude.  "Well, let us see what is to be derived from thisgloss.  Moses, the servant of God-he was but a servant, please tounderstand-Moses blessed with the hands; he held out both hisarms while the Hebrews beat their enemies, and then he blessedthem with his two hands.  Besides, what does the Gospel say?IMPONITE MANUS, and not MANUM-place the HANDS, not the HAND.""Place the HANDS," repeated the curate, with a gesture."St. Peter, on the contrary, of whom the Popes are thesuccessors," continued the Jesuit; "PORRIGE DIGITOS-present thefingers.  Are you there, now?"

    "CERTES," replied Aramis, in a pleased tone, "but the thing issubtle."

    "The FINGERS," resumed the Jesuit, "St. Peter blessed with theFINGERS.  The Pope, therefore blesses with the fingers.  And withhow many fingers does he bless?  With THREE fingers, to be sure-one for the Father, one for the Son, and one for the Holy Ghost."All crossed themselves.  D'Artagnan thought it was proper tofollow this example.

    "The Pope is the successor of St. Peter, and represents the threedivine powers; the rest-ORDINES INFERIORES-of the ecclesiasticalhierarchy bless in the name of the holy archangels and angels.The most humble clerks such as our deacons and sacristans, blesswith holy water sprinklers, which resemble an infinite number ofblessing fingers.  There is the subject simplified.  ARGUMENTUMOMNI DENUDATUM ORNAMENTO.  I could make of that subject twovolumes the size of this," continued the Jesuit; and in hisenthusiasm he struck a St. Chrysostom in folio, which made thetable bend beneath its weight.

    D'Artagnan trembled.

    "CERTES," said Aramis, "I do justice to the beauties of thisthesis; but at the same time I perceive it would be overwhelmingfor me.  I had chosen this text-tell me, dear D'Artagnan, if itis not to your taste-'NON INUTILE EST DESIDERIUM IN OBLATIONE';that is, 'A little regret is not unsuitable in an offering to theLord.'"

    "Stop there!" cried the Jesuit, "for that thesis touches closelyupon heresy.  There is a proposition almost like it in theAUGUSTINUS of the heresiarch Jansenius, whose book will sooner orlater be burned by the hands of the executioner.  Take care, myyoung friend.  You are inclining toward false doctrines, my youngfriend; you will be lost."

    "You will be lost," said the curate, shaking his headsorrowfully.

    "You approach that famous point of free will which is a mortalrock.  You face the insinuations of the Pelagians and the demi-Peligians."

    "But, my Reverend-" replied Aramis, a little amazed by the showerof arguments that poured upon his head.

    "How will you prove," continued the Jesuit, without allowing himtime to speak, "that we ought to regret the world when we offerourselves to God?  Listen to this dilemma: God is God, and theworld is the devil.  To regret the world is to regret the devil;that is my conclusion."

    "And that is mine also," said the curate.

    "But, for heaven's sake-" resumed Aramis.

    "DESIDERAS DIABOLUM, unhappy man!" cried the Jesuit."He regrets the devil!  Ah, my young friend," added the curate,groaning, "do not regret the devil, I implore you!"D'Artagnan felt himself bewildered.  It seemed to him as thoughhe were in a madhouse, and was becoming as mad as those he saw.He was, however, forced to hold his tongue from not comprehendinghalf the language they employed.

    "But listen to me, then," resumed Aramis with politeness mingledwith a little impatience.  "I do not say I regret; no, I willnever pronounce that sentence, which would not be orthodox."The Jesuit raised his hands toward heaven, and the curate did thesame.

    "No; but pray grant me that it is acting with an ill grace tooffer to the Lord only that with which we are perfectlydisgusted!  Don't you think so, D'Artagnan?"

    "I think so, indeed," cried he.

    The Jesuit and the curate quite started from their chairs."This is the point of departure; it is a syllogism.  The world isnot wanting in attractions.  I quit the world; then I make asacrifice.  Now, the Scripture says positively, 'Make a sacrificeunto the Lord.'"

    "That is true," said his antagonists.

    "And then," said Aramis, pinching his ear to make it red, as herubbed his hands to make them white, "and then I made a certainRONDEAU upon it last year, which I showed to Monsieur Voiture,and that great man paid me a thousand compliments.""A RONDEAU!" said the Jesuit, disdainfully.

    "A RONDEAU!" said the curate, mechanically.

    "Repeat it!  Repeat it!" cried D'Artagnan; "it will make a littlechange."

    "Not so, for it is religious," replied Aramis; "it is theology inverse."

    "The devil!" said D'Artagnan.

    "Here it is," said Aramis, with a little look of diffidence,which, however, was not exempt from a shade of hypocrisy:

    "Vous qui pleurez un passe plein de charmes,

    Et qui trainez des jours infortunes,

    Tous vos malheurs se verront termines,

    Quand a Dieu seul vous offrirez vos larmes,

    Vous qui pleurez!"

    "You who weep for pleasures fled,

    While dragging on a life of care,

    All your woes will melt in air,

    If to God your tears are shed,

    You who weep!"

    D'Artagnan and the curate appeared pleased.  The Jesuit persistedin his opinion.  "Beware of a profane taste in your theologicalstyle.  What says Augustine on this subject:  "'SEVERUS SITCLERICORUM VERBO.'"

    "Yes, let the sermon be clear," said the curate.

    "Now," hastily interrupted the Jesuit, on seeing that his acolytewas going astray, "now your thesis would please the ladies; itwould have the success of one of Monsieur Patru's pleadings.""Please God!" cried Aramis, transported.

    "There it is," cried the Jesuit; "the world still speaks withinyou in a loud voice, ALTISIMMA VOCE.  You follow the world, myyoung friend, and I tremble lest grace prove not efficacious.""Be satisfied, my reverend father, I can answer for myself.""Mundane presumption!"

    "I know myself, Father; my resolution is irrevocable.""Then you persist in continuing that thesis?"

    "I feel myself called upon to treat that, and no other.  I willsee about the continuation of it, and tomorrow I hope you will besatisfied with the corrections I shall have made in consequenceof your advice."

    "Work slowly," said the curate; "we leave you in an excellenttone of mind."

    "Yes, the ground is all sown," said the Jesuit, "and we have notto fear that one portion of the seed may have fallen upon stone,another upon the highway, or that the birds of heaven have eatenthe rest, AVES COELI COMEDERUNT ILLAM."

    "Plague stifle you and your Latin!" said D'Artagnan, who began tofeel all his patience exhausted.

    "Farewell, my son," said the curate, "till tomorrow.""Till tomorrow, rash youth," said the Jesuit.  "You promise tobecome one of the lights of the Church.  Heaven grant that thislight prove not a devouring fire!"

    D'Artagnan, who for an hour past had been gnawing his nails withimpatience, was beginning to attack the quick.

    The two men in black rose, bowed to Aramis and D'Artagnan, andadvanced toward the door.  Bazin, who had been standing listeningto all this controversy with a pious jubilation, sprang towardthem, took the breviary of the curate and the missal of theJesuit, and walked respectfully before them to clear their way.Aramis conducted them to the foot of the stairs, and themimmediately came up again to D'Artagnan, whose senses were stillin a state of confusion.

    When left alone, the two friends at first kept an embarrassedsilence.  It however became necessary for one of them to break itfirst, and as D'Artagnan appeared determined to leave that honorto his companion, Aramis said, "you see that I am returned to myfundamental ideas."

    "Yes, efficacious grace has touched you, as that gentleman saidjust now."

    "Oh, these plans of retreat have been formed for a long time.You have often heard me speak of them, have you not, my friend?""Yes; but I confess I always thought you jested.""With such things!  Oh, D'Artagnan!"

    "The devil!  Why, people jest with death."

    "And people are wrong, D'Artagnan; for death is the door whichleads to perdition or to salvation."

    "Granted; but if you please, let us not theologize, Aramis.  Youmust have had enough for today.  As for me, I have almostforgotten the little Latin I have ever known.  Then I confess toyou that I have eaten nothing since ten o'clock this morning, andI am devilish hungry."

    "We will dine directly, my friend; only you must please toremember that this is Friday.  Now, on such a day I can neithereat flesh nor see it eaten.  If you can be satisfied with mydinner-it consists of cooked tetragones and fruits.""What do you mean by tetragones?" asked D'Artagnan, uneasily."I mean spinach," replied Aramis; "but on your account I will addsome eggs, and that is a serious infraction of the rule-for eggsare meat, since they engender chickens."

    "This feast is not very succulent; but never mind, I will put upwith it for the sake of remaining with you."

    "I am grateful to you for the sacrifice," said Aramis; "but ifyour body be not greatly benefited by it, be assured your soulwill."

    "And so, Aramis, you are decidedly going into the Church?  Whatwill our two friends say?  What will Monsieur de Treville say?They will treat you as a deserter, I warn you."

    "I do not enter the Church; I re-enter it.  I deserted the Churchfor the world, for you know that I forced myself when I became aMusketeer."

    "I?  I know nothing about it."

    "You don't know I quit the seminary?"

    "Not at all."

    "This is my story, then.  Besides, the Scriptures say, 'Confessyourselves to one another,' and I confess to you, D'Artagnan.""And I give you absolution beforehand.  You see I am a good sortof a man."

    "Do not jest about holy things, my friend."

    "Go on, then, I listen."

    "I had been at the seminary from nine years old; in three days Ishould have been twenty.  I was about to become an abbe, and allwas arranged.  One evening I went, according to custom, to ahouse which I frequented with much pleasure:  when one is young,what can be expected?--one is weak.  An officer who saw me, witha jealous eye, reading the LIVES OF THE SAINTS to the mistress ofthe house, entered suddenly and without being announced.  Thatevening I had translated an episode of Judith, and had justcommunicated my verses to the lady, who gave me all sorts ofcompliments, and leaning on my shoulder, was reading them asecond time with me.  Her pose, which I must admit was ratherfree, wounded this officer.  He said nothing; but when I went outhe followed, and quickly came up with me.  'Monsieur the Abbe,'said he, 'do you like blows with a cane?' 'I cannot say,monsieur,' answered I; 'no one has ever dared to give me any.''Well, listen to me, then, Monsieur the Abbe!  If you ventureagain into the house in which I have met you this evening, I willdare it myself.'  I really think I must have been frightened.  Ibecame very pale; I felt my legs fail me; I sought for a reply,but could find none-I was silent.  The officer waited for hisreply, and seeing it so long coming, he burst into a laugh,turned upon his heel, and re-entered the house.  I returned tothe seminary.

    "I am a gentleman born, and my blood is warm, as you may haveremarked, my dear D'Artagnan.  The insult was terrible, andalthough unknown to the rest of the world, I felt it live andfester at the bottom of my heart.  I informed my superiors that Idid not feel myself sufficiently prepared for ordination, and atmy request the ceremony was postponed for a year.  I sought outthe best fencing master in Paris, I made an agreement with him totake a lesson every day, and every day for a year I took thatlesson.  Then, on the anniversary of the day on which I had beeninsulted, I hung my cassock on a peg, assumed the costume of acavalier, and went to a ball given by a lady friend of mine andto which I knew my man was invited.  It was in the Rue desFrance-Bourgeois, close to La Force.  As I expected, my officerwas there.  I went up to him as he was singing a love ditty andlooking tenderly at a lady, and interrupted him exactly in themiddle of the second couplet.  'Monsieur,' said I, 'does it stilldisplease you that I should frequent a certain house of La RuePayenne?  And would you still cane me if I took it into my headto disobey you?  The officer looked at me with astonishment, andthen said, 'What is your business with me, monsieur?  I do notknow you.'  'I am,' said I, 'the little abbe who reads LIVES OFTHE SAINTS, and translates Judith into verse.'  'Ah, ah!  Irecollect now,' said the officer, in a jeering tone; 'well, whatdo you want with me?'  'I want you to spare time to take a walkwith me.'  'Tomorrow morning, if you like, with the greatestpleasure.'  'No, not tomorrow morning, if you please, butimmediately.'  'If you absolutely insist.'  'I do insist uponit.'  'Come, then.  Ladies,' said the officer, 'do not disturbyourselves; allow me time just to kill this gentleman, and I willreturn and finish the last couplet.'

    "We went out.  I took him to the Rue Payenne, to exactly the samespot where, a year before, at the very same hour, he had paid methe compliment I have related to you.  It was a superb moonlightnight.  We immediately drew, and at the first pass I laid himstark dead."

    "The devil!" cried D'Artagnan.

    "Now," continued Aramis, "as the ladies did not see the singercome back, and as he was found in the Rue Payenne with a greatsword wound through his body, it was supposed that I hadaccommodated him thus; and the matter created some scandal whichobliged me to renounce the cassock for a time.  Athos, whoseacquaintance I made about that period, and Porthos, who had inaddition to my lessons taught me some effective tricks of fence,prevailed upon me to solicit the uniform of a Musketeer.  Theking entertained great regard for my father, who had fallen atthe siege Arras, and the uniform was granted.  You may understandthat the moment has come for me to re-enter the bosom of theChurch."

    "And why today, rather than yesterday or tomorrow?  What hashappened to you today, to raise all these melancholy ideas?""This wound, my dear D'Artagnan, has been a warning to me fromheaven."

    "This wound?  Bah, it is now nearly healed, and I am sure it isnot that which gives you the most pain."

    "What, then?" said Aramis, blushing."

    "You have one at heart, Aramis, one deeper and more painful-awound made by a woman."

    The eye of Aramis kindled in spite of himself.

    "Ah," said he, dissembling his emotion under a feignedcarelessness, "do not talk of such things, and suffer love pains?VANITAS VANITATUM!  According to your idea, then, my brain isturned.  And for whom-for some GRISETTE, some chambermaid withwhom I have trifled in some garrison?  Fie!"

    "Pardon, my dear Aramis, but I thought you carried your eyeshigher."

    "Higher?  And who am I, to nourish such ambition?  A poorMusketeer, a beggar, an unknown-who hates slavery, and findshimself ill-placed in the world."

    "Aramis, Aramis!" cried D'Artagnan, looking at his friend with anair of doubt.

    "Dust I am, and to dust I return.  Life is full of humiliationsand sorrows," continued he, becoming still more melancholy; "allthe ties which attach him to life break in the hand of man,particularly the golden ties.  Oh, my dear D'Artagnan," resumedAramis, giving to his voice a slight tone of bitterness, "trustme!  Conceal your wounds when you have any; silence is the lastjoy of the unhappy.  Beware of giving anyone the clue to yourgriefs; the curious suck our tears as flies suck the blood of awounded hart."

    "Alas, my dear Aramis," said D'Artagnan, in his turn heaving aprofound sigh, "that is my story you are relating!""How?"

    "Yes; a woman whom I love, whom I adore, has just been torn fromme by force.  I do not know where she is or whither they haveconducted her.  She is perhaps a prisoner; she is perhaps dead!""Yes, but you have at least this consolation, that you can say toyourself she has not quit you voluntarily, that if you learn nonews of her, it is because all communication with you ininterdicted; while I-"

    "Well?"

    "Nothing," replied Aramis, "nothing."

    "So you renounce the world, then, forever; that is a settledthing-a resolution registered!"

    "Forever!  You are my friend today; tomorrow you will be no moreto me than a shadow, or rather, even, you will no longer exist.As for the world, it is a sepulcher and nothing else.""The devil!  All this is very sad which you tell me.""What will you?  My vocation commands me; it carries me away."D'Artagnan smiled, but made no answer.

    Aramis continued, "And yet, while I do belong to the earth, Iwish to speak of you-of our friends."

    "And on my part," said D'Artagnan, "I wished to speak of you, butI find you so completely detached from everything!  To love youcry, 'Fie!  Friends are shadows!  The world is a sepulcher!'""Alas, you will find it so yourself," said Aramis, with a sigh."Well, then, let us say no more about it," said D'Artagnan; "andlet us burn this letter, which, no doubt, announces to you somefresh infidelity of your GRISETTE or your chambermaid.""What letter?" cried Aramis, eagerly.

    "A letter which was sent to your abode in your absence, and whichwas given to me for you."

    "But from whom is that letter?"

    "Oh, from some heartbroken waiting woman, some despondingGRISETTE; from Madame de Chevreuse's chambermaid, perhaps, whowas obliged to return to Tours with her mistress, and who, inorder to appear smart and attractive, stole some perfumed paper,and sealed her letter with a duchess's coronet."

    "What do you say?"

    "Hold!  I must have lost it,"  said the young man maliciously,pretending to search for it.  "But fortunately the world is asepulcher; the men, and consequently the women, are but shadows,and love is a sentiment to which you cry, 'Fie!  Fie!'""D'Artagnan, D'Artagnan," cried Aramis, "you are killing me!""Well, here it is at last!" said D'Artagnan, as he drew theletter from his pocket.

    Aramis made a bound, seized the letter, read it, or ratherdevoured it, his countenance radiant.

    "This same waiting maid seems to have an agreeable style," saidthe messenger, carelessly.

    "Thanks, D'Artagnan, thanks!" cried Aramis, almost in a state ofdelirium.  "She was forced to return to Tours; she is notfaithless; she still loves me!  Come, my friend, come, let meembrace you.  Happiness almost stifles me!"

    The two friends began to dance around the venerable St.Chrysostom, kicking about famously the sheets of the thesis,which had fallen on the floor.

    At that moment Bazin entered with the spinach and the omelet."Be off, you wretch!" cried Aramis, throwing his skullcap in hisface.  "Return whence you came; take back those horriblevegetables, and that poor kickshaw!  Order a larded hare, a fatcapon, mutton leg dressed with garlic, and four bottles of oldBurgundy."

    Bazin, who looked at his master, without comprehending the causeof this change, in a melancholy manner, allowed the omelet toslip into the spinach, and the spinach onto the floor."Now this is the moment to consecrate your existence to the Kingof kings," said D'Artagnan, "if you persist in offering him acivility.  NON INUTILE DESIDERIUM OBLATIONE."

    "Go to the devil with your Latin.  Let us drink, my dearD'Artagnan, MORBLEU!  Let us drink while the wine is fresh!  Letus drink heartily, and while we do so, tell me a little of whatis going on in the world yonder."

    27  THE WIFE OF ATHOS

    "We have now to search for Athos," said D'Artagnan to thevivacious Aramis, when he had informed him of all that had passedsince their departure from the capital, and an excellent dinnerhad made one of them forget his thesis and the other his fatigue."Do you think, then, that any harm can have happened to him?"asked Aramis.  "Athos is so cool, so brave, and handles his swordso skillfully."

    "No doubt.  Nobody has a higher opinion of the courage and skillof Athos than I have; but I like better to hear my sword clangagainst lances than against staves.  I fear lest Athos shouldhave been beaten down by serving men.  Those fellows strike hard,and don't leave off in a hurry.  This is why I wish to set outagain as soon as possible."

    "I will try to accompany you," said Aramis, "though I scarcelyfeel in a condition to mount on horseback.  Yesterday I undertookto employ that cord which you see hanging against the wall, butpain prevented my continuing the pious exercise.""That's the first time I ever heard of anybody trying to curegunshot wounds with cat-o'-nine-tails; but you were ill, andillness renders the head weak, therefore you may be excused.""When do you mean to set out?"

    "Tomorrow at daybreak.  Sleep as soundly as you can tonight, andtomorrow, if you can, we will take our departure together.""Till tomorrow, then," said Aramis; "for iron-nerved as you are,you must need repose."

    The next morning, when D'Artagnan entered Aramis's chamber, hefound him at the window.

    "What are you looking at?" asked D'Artagnan.

    "My faith!  I am admiring three magnificent horses which thestable boys are leading about.  It would be a pleasure worthy ofa prince to travel upon such horses."

    "Well, my dear Aramis, you may enjoy that pleasure, for one ofthose three horses is yours."

    "Ah, bah!  Which?"

    "Whichever of the three you like, I have no preference.""And the rich caparison, is that mine, too?"

    "Without doubt."

    "You laugh, D'Artagnan."

    "No, I have left off laughing, now that you speak French.""What, those rich holsters, that velvet housing, that saddlestudded with silver-are they all for me?"

    "For you and nobody else, as the horse which paws the ground ismine, and the other horse, which is caracoling, belongs toAthos."

    "PESTE!  They are three superb animals!"

    "I am glad they please you."

    "Why, it must have been the king who made you such a present.""Certainly it was not the cardinal; but don't trouble yourselfwhence they come, think only that one of the three is yourproperty."

    "I choose that which the red-headed boy is leading.""It is yours!"

    "Good heaven!  That is enough to drive away all my pains; I couldmount him with thirty balls in my body.  On my soul, handsomestirrups!  HOLA, Bazin, come here this minute."

    Bazin appeared on the threshold, dull and spiritless."That last order is useless," interrupted D'Artagnan; "there areloaded pistols in your holsters."

    Bazin sighed.

    "Come, Monsieur Bazin, make yourself easy," said D'Artagnan;"people of all conditions gain the kingdom of heaven.""Monsieur was already such a good theologian," said Bazin, almostweeping; "he might have become a bishop, and perhaps a cardinal.""Well, but my poor Bazin, reflect a little.  Of what use is it tobe a churchman, pray?  You do not avoid going to war by thatmeans; you see, the cardinal is about to make the next campaign,helm on head and partisan in hand.  And Monsieur de Nogaret de laValette, what do you say of him?  He is a cardinal likewise.  Askhis lackey how often he has had to prepare lint of him.""Alas!" sighed Bazin.  "I know it, monsieur; everything is turnedtopsy-turvy in the world nowadays."

    While this dialogue was going on, the two young men and the poorlackey descended.

    "Hold my stirrup, Bazin," cried Aramis; and Aramis sprang intothe saddle with his usual grace and agility, but after a fewvaults and curvets of the noble animal his rider felt his painscome on so insupportably that he turned pale and became unsteadyin his seat.  D'Artagnan, who, foreseeing such an event, had kepthis eye on him, sprang toward him, caught him in his arms, andassisted him to his chamber.

    "That's all right, my dear Aramis, take care of yourself," saidhe; "I will go alone in search of Athos."

    "You are a man of brass," replied Aramis.

    "No, I have good luck, that is all.  But how do you mean to passyour time till I come back?  No more theses, no more glosses uponthe fingers or upon benedictions, hey?"

    Aramis smiled.  "I will make verses," said he.

    "Yes, I dare say; verses perfumed with the odor of the billetfrom the attendant of Madame de Chevreuse.  Teach Bazin prosody;that will console him.  As to the horse, ride him a little everyday, and that will accustom you to his maneuvers.""Oh, make yourself easy on that head," replied Aramis.  "You willfind me ready to follow you."

    They took leave of each other, and in ten minutes, after havingcommended his friend to the cares of the hostess and Bazin,D'Artagnan was trotting along in the direction of Ameins.How was he going to find Athos?  Should he find him at all?  Theposition in which he had left him was critical.  He probably hadsuccumbed.  This idea, while darkening his brow, drew severalsighs from him, and caused him to formulate to himself a few vowsof vengeance.  Of all his friends, Athos was the eldest, and theleast resembling him in appearance, in his tastes and sympathies.Yet he entertained a marked preference for this gentleman.  Thenoble and distinguished air of Athos, those flashes of greatnesswhich from time to time broke out from the shade in which hevoluntarily kept himself, that unalterable equality of temperwhich made him the most pleasant companion in the world, thatforced and cynical gaiety, that bravery which might have beentermed blind if it had not been the result of the rarestcoolness-such qualities attracted more than the esteem, more thanthe friendship of D'Artagnan; they attracted his admiration.Indeed, when placed beside M. de Treville, the elegant and noblecourtier, Athos in his most cheerful days might advantageouslysustain a comparison.  He was of middle height; but his personwas so admirably shaped and so well proportioned that more thanonce in his struggles with Porthos he had overcome the giantwhose physical strength was proverbial among the Musketeers.  Hishead, with piercing eyes, a straight nose, a chim cut like thatof Brutus, had altogether an indefinable character of grandeurand grace.  His hands, of which he took little care, were thedespair of Aramis, who cultivated his with almond paste andperfumed oil.  The sound of his voice was at once penetrating andmelodious; and then, that which was inconceivable in Athos, whowas always retiring, was that delicate knowledge of the world andof the usages of the most brilliant society-those manners of ahigh degree which appeared, as if unconsciously to himself, inhis least actions.

    If a repast were on foot, Athos presided over it better than anyother, placing every guest exactly in the rank which hisancestors had earned for him or that he had made for himself.  Ifa question in heraldry were started, Athos knew all the noblefamilies of the kingdom, their genealogy, their alliances, theircoats of arms, and the origin of them.  Etiquette had no minutiaeunknown to him.  He knew what were the rights of the great landowners.  He was profoundly versed in hunting and falconry, andhad one day when conversing on this great art astonished evenLouis XIII himself, who took a pride in being considered a pastmaster therein.

    Like all the great nobles of that period, Athos rode and fencedto perfection.  But still further, his education had been solittle neglected, even with respect to scholastic studies, sorare at this time among gentlemen, that he smiled at the scrapsof Latin which Aramis sported and which Porthos pretended tounderstand.  Two or three times, even, to the great astonishmentof his friends, he had, when Aramis allowed some rudimental errorto escape him, replaced a verb in its right tense and a noun inits case.  Besides, his probity was irreproachable, in an age inwhich soldiers compromised so easily with their religion andtheir consciences, lovers with the rigorous delicacy of our era,and the poor with God's Seventh Commandment.  This Athos, then,was a very extraordinary man.

    And yet this nature so distinguished, this creature so beautiful,this essence so fine, was seen to turn insensibly toward materiallike, as old men turn toward physical and moral imbecility.Athos, in his hours of gloom-and these hours were frequent-wasextinguished as to the whole of the luminous portion of him, andhis brilliant side disappeared as into profound darkness.Then the demigod vanished; he remained scarcely a man.  His headhanging down, his eye dull, his speech slow and painful, Athoswould look for hours together at his bottle, his glass, or atGrimaud, who, accustomed to obey him by signs, read in the faintglance of his master his least desire, and satisfied itimmediately.  If the four friends were assembled at one of thesemoments, a word, thrown forth occasionally with a violent effort,was the share Athos furnished to the conversation.  In exchangefor his silence Athos drank enough for four, and withoutappearing to be otherwise affected by wine than by a more markedconstriction of the brow and by a deeper sadness.D'Artagnan, whose inquiring disposition we are acquainted with,had not-whatever interest he had in satisfying his curiosity onthis subject-been able to assign any cause for these fits of forthe periods of their recurrence.  Athos never received anyletters; Athos never had concerns which all his friends did notknow.

    It could not be said that it was wine which produced thissadness; for in truth he only drank to combat this sadness, whichwine however, as we have said, rendered still darker.  Thisexcess of bilious humor could not be attributed to play; forunlike Porthos, who accompanied the variations of chance withsongs or oaths, Athos when he won remained as unmoved as when helost.  He had been known, in the circle of the Musketeers, to winin one night three thousand pistoles; to lose them even to thegold-embroidered belt for gala days, win all this again with theaddition of a hundred louis, without his beautiful eyebrow beingheightened or lowered half a line, without his hands losing theirpearly hue, without his conversation, which was cheerful thatevening, ceasing to be calm and agreeable.

    Neither was it, as with our neighbors, the English, anatmospheric influence which darkened his countenance; for thesadness generally became more intense toward the fine season ofthe year.  June and July were the terrible months with Athos.For the present he had no anxiety.  He shrugged his shoulderswhen people spoke of the feature.  His secret, then, was in thepast, as had often been vaguely said to D'Artagnan.This mysterious shade, spread over his whole person, renderedstill more interesting the man whose eyes or mouth, even in themost complete intoxication, had never revealed anything, howeverskillfully questions had been put to him.

    "Well," thought D'Artagnan, "poor Athos is perhaps at this momentdead, and dead by my fault-for it was I who dragged him into thisaffair, of which he did not know the origin, of which he isignorant of the result, and from which he can derive noadvantage."

    "Without reckoning, monsieur," added Planchet to his master'saudibly expressed reflections, "that we perhaps owe our lives tohim.  Do you remember how he cried, 'On, D'Artagnan, on, I amtaken'?  And when he had discharged his two pistols, what aterrible noise he made with his sword!  One might have said thattwenty men, or rather twenty mad devils, were fighting."These words redoubled the eagerness of D'Artagnan, who urged hishorse, though he stood in need of no incitement, and theyproceeded at a rapid pace.  About eleven o'clock in the morningthey perceived Ameins, and at half past eleven they were at thedoor of the cursed inn.

    D'Artagnan had often meditated against the perfidious host one ofthose hearty vengeances which offer consolation while they arehoped for.  He entered the hostelry with his hat pulled over hiseyes, his left hand on the pommel of the sword, and cracking hiswhip with his right hand.

    "Do you remember me?" said he to the host, who advanced to greethim.

    "I have not that honor, monseigneur," replied the latter, hiseyes dazzled by the brilliant style in which D'Artagnan traveled."What, you don't know me?"

    "No, monseigneur."

    "Well, two words will refresh your memory.  What have you donewith that gentleman against whom you had the audacity, abouttwelve days ago, to make an accusation of passing false money?"The host became as pale as death; for D'Artagnan had assumed athreatening attitude, and Planchet modeled himself after hismaster.

    "Ah, monseigneur, do not mention it!" cried the host, in the mostpitiable voice imaginable.  "Ah, monseigneur, how dearly have Ipaid for that fault, unhappy wretch as I am!"

    "That gentleman, I say, what has become of him?"

    "Deign to listen to me, monseigneur, and be merciful!  Sit down,in mercy!"

    D'Artagnan, mute with anger and anxiety, took a seat in thethreatening attitude of a judge.  Planchet glared fiercely overthe back of his armchair.

    "Here is the story, monseigneur," resumed the trembling host;"for I now recollect you.  It was you who rode off at the momentI had that unfortunate difference with the gentleman you speakof."

    "Yes, it was I; so you may plainly perceive that you have nomercy to expect of you do not tell me the whole truth.""Condescend to listen to me, and you shall know all.""I listen."

    "I had been warned by the authorities that a celebrated coiner ofbad money would arrive at my inn, with several of his companions,all disguised as Guards or Musketeers.  Monseigneur, I wasfurnished with a description of your horses, your lackeys, yourcountenances-nothing was omitted."

    "Go on, go on!" said D'Artagnan, who quickly understood whencesuch an exact description had come.

    "I took then, in conformity with the orders of the authorities,who sent me a reinforcement of six men, such measures as Ithought necessary to get possession of the persons of thepretended coiners."

    "Again!" said D'Artagnan, whose ears chafed terribly under therepetition of this word COINERs.

    "Pardon me, monseigneur, for saying such things, but they form myexcuse.  The authorities had terrified me, and you know that aninnkeeper must keep on good terms with the authorities.""But once again, that gentleman-where is he?  What has become ofhim?  Is he dead?  Is he living?"

    "Patience, monseigneur, we are coming to it.  There happened thenthat which you know, and of which your precipitate departure,"added the host, with an acuteness that did not escape D'Artagnan,"appeared to authorize the issue.  That gentleman, your friend,defended himself desperately.  His lackey, who, by an unforeseenpiece of ill luck, had quarreled with the officers, disguised asstable lads-"

    "Miserable scoundrel!" cried D'Artagnan, "you were all in theplot, then!  And I really don't know what prevents me fromexterminating you all."

    "Alas, monseigneur, we were not in the plot, as you will soonsee.  Monsieur your friend (pardon for not calling him by thehonorable name which no doubt he bears, but we do not know thatname), Monsieur your friend, having disabled two men with hispistols, retreated fighting with his sword, with which he disableone of my men, and stunned me with a blow of the flat side ofit."

    "You villian, will you finish?" cried D'Artagnan, "Athos-what hasbecome of Athos?"

    "While fighting and retreating, as I have told Monseigneur, hefound the door of the cellar stairs behind him, and as the doorwas open, he took out the key, and barricaded himself inside.  Aswe were sure of finding him there, we left him alone.""Yes," said D'Artagnan, "you did not really wish to kill; youonly wished to imprison him."

    "Good God!  To imprison him, monseigneur?  Why, he imprisonedhimself, I swear to you he did.  In the first place he had maderough work of it; one man was killed on the spot, and two otherswere severely wounded.  The dead man and the two wounded werecarried off by their comrades, and I have heard nothing of eitherof them since.  As for myself, as soon as I recovered my senses Iwent to Monsieur the Governor, to whom I related all that hadpassed, and asked, what I should do with my prisoner.  Monsieurthe Governor was all astonishment.  He told me he knew nothingabout the matter, that the orders I had received did not comefrom him, and that if I had the audacity to mention his name asbeing concerned in this disturbance he would have me hanged.  Itappears that I had made a mistake, monsieur, that I had arrestedthe wrong person, and that he whom I ought to have arrested hadescaped."

    "But Athos!" cried D'Artagnan, whose impatience was increased bythe disregard of the authorities, "Athos, where is he?""As I was anxious to repair the wrongs I had done the prisoner,"resumed the innkeeper, "I took my way straight to the cellar inorder to set him at liberty.  Ah, monsieur, he was no longer aman, he was a devil!  To my offer of liberty, he replied that itwas nothing but a snare, and that before he came out he intendedto impose his own conditions.  I told him very humbly-for I couldnot conceal from myself the scrape I had got into by laying handson one of his Majesty's Musketeers-I told him I was quite readyto submit to his conditions.

    "'In the first place,' said he, 'I wish my lackey placed with me,fully armed.'  We hastened to obey this order; for you willplease to understand, monsieur, we were disposed to do everythingyour friend could desire.  Monsieur Grimaud (he told us his name,although he does not talk much)-Monsieur Grimaud, then, went downto the cellar, wounded as he was; then his master, havingadmitted him, barricaded the door afresh, and ordered us toremain quietly in our own bar."

    "But where is Athos now?" cried D'Artagnan.  "Where is Athos?""In the cellar, monsieur."

    "What, you scoundrel!  Have you kept him in the cellar all thistime?"

    "Merciful heaven!  No, monsieur!  We keep him in the cellar!  Youdo not know what he is about in the cellar.  Ah!  If you couldbut persuade him to come out, monsieur, I should owe you thegratitude of my whole life; I should adore you as my patronsaint!"

    "Then he is there?  I shall find him there?"

    "Without doubt you will, monsieur; he persists in remainingthere.  We every day pass through the air hole some bread at theend of a fork, and some meat when he asks for it; but alas!  Itis not of bread and meat of which he makes the greatestconsumption.  I once endeavored to go down with two of myservants; but he flew into terrible rage.  I heard the noise hemade in loading his pistols, and his servant in loading hismusketoon.  Then, when we asked them what were their intentions,the master replied that he had forty charges to fire, and that heand his lackey would fire to the last one before he would allow asingle soul of us to set foot in the cellar.  Upon this I wentand complained to the governor, who replied that I only had whatI deserved, and that it would teach me to insult honorablegentlemen who took up their abode in my house."

    "So that since that time-" replied D'Artagnan, totally unable torefrain from laughing at the pitiable face of the host."So from that time, monsieur," continued the latter, "we have ledthe most miserable life imaginable; for you must know, monsieur,that all our provisions are in the cellar.  There is our wine inbottles, and our wine in casks; the beer, the oil, and thespices, the bacon, and sausages.  And as we are prevented fromgoing down there, we are forced to refuse food and drink to thetravelers who come to the house; so that our hostelry is dailygoing to ruin.  If your friend remains another week in my cellarI shall be a ruined man."

    "And not more than justice, either, you ass!  Could you notperceive by our appearance that we were people of quality, andnot coiners-say?"

    "Yes, monsieur, you are right," said the host.  "But, hark, hark!There he is!"

    "Somebody has disturbed him, without doubt," said D'Artagnan."But he must be disturbed," cried the host; "Here are two Englishgentlemen just arrived."

    "well?"

    "Well, the English like good wine, as you may know, monsieur;these have asked for the best.  My wife has perhaps requestedpermission of Monsieur Athos to go into the cellar to satisfythese gentlemen; and he, as usual, has refused.  Ah, good heaven!There is the hullabaloo louder than ever!"

    D'Artagnan, in fact, heard a great noise on the side next thecellar.  He rose, and preceded by the host wringing his hands,and followed by Planchet with his musketoon ready for use, heapproached the scene of action.

    The two gentlemen were exasperated; they had had a long ride, andwere dying with hunger and thirst.

    "But this is tyranny!" cried one of them, in very good French,though with a foreign accent, "that this madman will not allowthese good people access to their own wine!  Nonsense, let usbreak open the door, and if he is too far gone in his madness,well, we will kill him!"

    "Softly, gentlemen!" said D'Artagnan, drawing his pistols fromhis belt, "you will kill nobody, if you please!"

    "Good, good!" cried the calm voice of Athos, from the other sideof the door, "let them just come in, these devourers of littlechildren, and we shall see!"

    Brave as they appeared to be, the two English gentlemen looked ateach other hesitatingly.  One might have thought there was inthat cellar one of those famished ogres--the gigantic heroes ofpopular legends, into whose cavern nobody could force their waywith impunity.

    There was a moment of silence; but at length the two Englishmenfelt ashamed to draw back, and the angrier one descended the fiveor six steps which led to the cellar, and gave a kick against thedoor enough to split a wall.

    "Planchet," said D'Artagnan, cocking his pistols, "I will takecharge of the one at the top; you look to the one below.  Ah,gentlemen, you want battle; and you shall have it.""Good God!" cried the hollow voice of Athos, "I can hearD'Artagnan, I think."

    "Yes," cried D'Artagnan, raising his voice in turn, "I am here,my friend."

    "Ah, good, then," replied Athos, "we will teach them, these doorbreakers!"

    The gentlemen had drawn their swords, but they found themselvestake between two fires.  They still hesitated an instant; but, asbefore, pride prevailed, and a second kick split the door frombottom to top.

    "Stand on one side, D'Artagnan, stand on one side," cried Athos."I am going to fire!"

    "Gentlemen," exclaimed D'Artagnan, whom reflection neverabandoned, "gentlemen, think of what you are about.  Patience,Athos!  You are running your heads into a very silly affair; youwill be riddled.  My lackey and I will have three shots at you,and you will get as many from the cellar.  You will then have outswords, with which, I can assure you, my friend and I can playtolerably well.  Let me conduct your business and my own.  Youshall soon have something to drink; I give you my word.""If there is any left," grumbled the jeering voice of Athos.The host felt a cold sweat creep down his back.

    "How!  'If there is any left!" murmured he.

    "What the devil!  There must be plenty left," replied D'Artagnan."Be satisfied of that; these two cannot have drunk all thecellar.  Gentlemen, return your swords to their scabbards.""Well, provided you replace your pistols in your belt.""Willingly."

    And D'Artagnan set the example.  Then, turning toward Planchet,he made him a sign to uncock his musketoon.

    The Englishmen, convinced of these peaceful proceedings, sheathedtheir swords grumblingly.  The history of Athos's imprisonmentwas then related to them; and as they were really gentlemen, theypronounced the host in the wrong.

    "Now, gentlemen," said D'Artagnan, "go up to your room again; andin ten minutes, I will answer for it, you shall have all youdesire."

    The Englishmen bowed and went upstairs.

    "Now I am alone, my dear Athos," said D'Artagnan; "open the door,I beg of you."

    "Instantly," said Athos.

    Then was heard a great noise of fagots being removed and of thegroaning of posts; these were the counterscarps and bastions ofAthos, which the besieged himself demolished.

    An instant after, the broken door was removed, and the pale faceof Athos appeared, who with a rapid glance took a survey of thesurroundings.

    D'Artagnan threw himself on his neck and embraced him tenderly.He then tried to draw him from his moist abode, but to hissurprise he perceived that Athos staggered.

    "You are wounded," said he.

    "I!  Not at all.  I am dead drunk, that's all, and never did aman more strongly set about getting so.  By the Lord, my goodhost!  I must at least have drunk for my part a hundred and fiftybottles."

    "Mercy!" cried the host, "if the lackey has drunk only half asmuch as the master, I am a ruined man."

    "Grimaud is a well-bred lackey.  He would never think of faringin the same manner as his master; he only drank from the cask.Hark!  I don't think he put the faucet in again.  Do you hear it?It is running now."

    D'Artagnan burst into a laugh which changed the shiver of thehost into a burning fever.

    In the meantime, Grimaud appeared in his turn behind his master,with the musketoon on his shoulder, and his head shaking. Likeone of those drunken satyrs in the pictures of Rubens.  He wasmoistened before and behind with a greasy liquid which the hostrecognized as his best olive oil.

    The four crossed the public room and proceeded to take possessionof the best apartment in the house, which D'Artagnan occupiedwith authority.

    In the meantime the host and his wife hurried down with lampsinto the cellar, which had so long been interdicted to them andwhere a frightful spectacle awaited them.

    Beyond the fortifications through which Athos had made a breachin order to get out, and which were composed of fagots, planks,and empty casks, heaped up according to all the rules of thestrategic art, they found, swimming in puddles of oil and wine,the bones and fragments of all the hams they had eaten; while aheap of broken bottles filled the whole left-hand corner of thecellar, and a tun, the cock of which was left running, wasyielding, by this means, the last drop of its blood.  "The imageof devastation and death," as the ancient poet says, "reigned asover a field of battle."

    Of fifty large sausages, suspended from the joists, scarcely tenremained.

    Then the lamentations of the host and hostess pierced the vaultof the cellar.  D'Artagnan himself was moved by them.  Athos didnot even turn his head.

    To grief succeeded rage.  The host armed himself with a spit, andrushed into the chamber occupied by the two friends."Some wine!" said Athos, on perceiving the host.

    "Some wine!" cried the stupefied host, "some wine?  Why you havedrunk more than a hundred pistoles' worth!  I am a ruined man,lost, destroyed!"

    "Bah," said Athos, "we were always dry."

    "If you had been contented with drinking, well and good; but youhave broken all the bottles."

    "You pushed me upon a heap which rolled down.  That was yourfault."

    "All my oil is lost!"

    "Oil is a sovereign balm for wounds; and my poor Grimaud here wasobliged to dress those you had inflicted on him.""All my sausages are gnawed!"

    "There is an enormous quantity of rats in that cellar.""You shall pay me for all this," cried the exasperated host."Triple ass!" said Athos, rising; but he sank down againimmediately.  He had tried his strength to the utmost.D'Artagnan came to his relief with his whip in his hand.The host drew back and burst into tears.

    "This will teach you," said D'Artagnan, "to treat the guests Godsends you in a more courteous fashion."

    "God?  Say the devil!"

    "My dear friend," said D'Artagnan, "if you annoy us in thismanner we will all four go and shut ourselves up in your cellar,and we will see if the mischief is as great as you say.""Oh, gentlemen," said the host, "I have been wrong.  I confessit, but pardon to every sin!  You are gentlemen, and I am a poorinnkeeper.  You will have pity on me."

    "Ah, if you speak in that way," said Athos, "you will break myheart, and the tears will flow from my eyes as the wine flowedfrom the cask.  We are not such devils as we appear to be.  Comehither, and let us talk."

    The host approached with hesitation.

    "Come hither, I say, and don't be afraid," continued Athos.  "Atthe very moment when I was about to pay you, I had placed mypurse on the table."

    "Yes, monsieur."

    "That purse contained sixty pistoles; where is it?""Deposited with the justice; they said it was bad money.""Very well; get me my purse back and keep the sixty pistoles.""But Monseigneur knows very well that justice never lets go thatwhich it once lays hold of.  If it were bad money, there might besome hopes; but unfortunately, those were all good pieces.""Manage the matter as well as you can, my good man; it does notconcern me, the more so as I have not a livre left.""Come," said D'Artagnan, "let us inquire further.  Athos's horse,where is that?"

    "In the stable."

    "How much is it worth?"

    "Fifty pistoles at most."

    "It's worth eighty.  Take it, and there ends the matter.""What," cried Athos, "are you selling my horse--my Bajazet?  Andpray upon what shall I make my campaign; upon Grimaud?""I have brought you another," said D'Artagnan.

    "Another?"

    "And a magnificent one!" cried the host.

    "Well, since there is another finer and younger, why, you maytake the old one; and let us drink."

    "What?" asked the host, quite cheerful again.

    "Some of that at the bottom, near the laths.  There are twenty-five bottles of it left; all the rest were broken by my fall.Bring six of them."

    "Why, this man is a cask!" said the host, aside.  "If he onlyremains here a fortnight, and pays for what he drinks, I shallsoon re-establish my business."

    "And don't forget," said D'Artagnan, "to bring up four bottles ofthe same sort for the two English gentlemen."

    "And now," said Athos, "while they bring the wine, tell me,D'Artagnan, what has become of the others, come!"D'Artagnan related how he had found Porthos in bed with astrained knee, and Aramis at a table between two theologians.  Ashe finished, the host entered with the wine ordered and a hamwhich, fortunately for him, had been left out of the cellar."That's well!" said Athos, filling his glass and that of hisfriend; "here's to Porthos and Aramis!  But you, D'Artagnan, whatis the matter with you, and what has happened to you personally?You have a sad air."

    "Alas," said D'Artagnan, "it is because I am the mostunfortunate?  Tell me."

    "Presently," said D'Artagnan.

    "Presently!  And why presently?  Because you think I am drunk?D'Artagnan, remember this!  My ideas are never so clear as when Ihave had plenty of wine.  Speak, then, I am all ears."D'Artagnan related his adventure with Mme. Bonacieux.  Athoslistened to him without a frown; and when he had finished, said,"Trifles, only trifles!"  That was his favorite word."You always say TRIFLES, my dear Athos!" said D'Artagnan, "andthat come very ill from you, who have never loved."The drink-deadened eye of Athos flashed out, but only for amoment; it became as dull and vacant as before.

    "That's true," said he, quietly, "for my part I have neverloved."

    "Acknowledge, then, you stony heart," said D'Artagnan, "that youare wrong to be so hard upon us tender hearts."

    "Tender hearts!   Pierced hearts!" said Athos.

    "What do you say?"

    "I say that love is a lottery in which he who wins, wins death!You are very fortunate to have lost, believe me, my dearD'Artagnan.  And if I have any counsel to give, it is, alwayslose!"

    "She seemed to love me so!"

    "She SEEMED, did she?"

    "Oh, she DID love me!"

    "You child, why, there is not a man who has not believed, as youdo, that his mistress loved him, and there lives not a man whohas not been deceived by his mistress."

    "Except you, Athos, who never had one."

    "That's true," said Athos, after a moment's silence, "that'strue!  I never had one!  Let us drink!"

    "But then, philosopher that you are," said D'Artagnan, "instructme, support me.  I stand in need of being taught and consoled.""Consoled for what?"

    "For my misfortune."

    "Your misfortune is laughable," said Athos, shrugging hisshoulders; "I should like to know what you would say if I were torelate to you a real tale of love!"

    "Which has happened to you?"

    "Or one of my friends, what matters?"

    "Tell it, Athos, tell it."

    "Better if I drink."

    "Drink and relate, then."

    "Not a bad idea!" said Athos, emptying and refilling his glass."The two things agree marvelously well."

    "I am all attention," said D'Artagnan.

    Athos collected himself, and in proportion as he did so,D'Artagnan saw that he became pale.  He was at that period ofintoxication in which vulgar drinkers fall and sleep.  He kepthimself upright and dreamed, without sleeping.  This somnambulismof drunkenness had something frightful in it.

    "You particularly wish it?" asked he.

    "I pray for it," said D'Artagnan.

    "Be it then as you desire.  One of my friends--one of my friends,please to observe, not myself," said Athos, interrupting himselfwith a melancholy smile, "one of the counts of my province--thatis to say, of Berry--noble as a Dandolo or a Montmorency, attwenty-five years of age fell in love with a girl of sixteen,beautiful as fancy can paint.  Through the ingenuousness of herage beamed an ardent mind, not of the woman, but of the poet.She did not please; she intoxicated.  She lived in a small townwith her brother, who was a curate.  Both had recently come intothe country.  They came nobody knew whence; but when seeing herso lovely and her brother so pious, nobody thought of askingwhence they came.  They were said, however, to be of goodextraction.  My friend, who was seigneur of the country, mighthave seduced her, or taken her by force, at his will--for he wasmaster.  Who would have come to the assistance of two strangers,two unknown persons?  Unfortunately he was an honorable man; hemarried her.  The fool!  The ass!  The idiot!"

    "How so, if he love her?" asked D'Artagnan.

    "Wait," said Athos.  "He took her to his chateau, and made herthe first lady in the province; and in justice it must be allowedthat she supported her rank becomingly."

    "Well?" asked D'Artagnan.

    "Well, one day when she was hunting with her husband," continuedAthos, in a low voice, and speaking very quickly," she fell fromher horse and fainted.  The count flew to her to help, and as sheappeared to be oppressed by her clothes, he ripped them open withhis poinard, and in so doing laid bare her shoulder.D'Artagnan," said Athos, with a maniacal burst of laughter,"guess what she had on her shoulder."

    "How can I tell?" said D'Artagnan.

    "A FLEUR-DE-LIS," said Athos.  "She was branded."Athos emptied at a single draught the glass he held in his hand."Horror!" cried D'Artagnan.  "What do you tell me?""Truth, my friend.  The angel was a demon; the poor young girlhad stolen the sacred vessels from a church."

    "And what did the count do?"

    "The count was of the highest nobility.  He had on his estatesthe rights of high and low tribunals.  He tore the dress of thecountess to pieces; he tied her hands behind her, and hanged heron a tree."

    "Heavens, Athos, a murder?" cried D'Artagnan.

    "No less," said Athos, as pale as a corpse.  "But methinks I needwine!" and he seized by the neck the last bottle that was left,put it to his mouth, and emptied it at a single draught, as hewould have emptied an ordinary glass.

    Then he let his head sink upon his two hands, while D'Artagnanstood before him, stupefied.

    "That has cured me of beautiful, poetical, and loving women,"said Athos, after a considerable pause, raising his head, andforgetting to continue the fiction of the count.  "God grant youas much!  Let us drink."

    "Then she is dead?" stammered D'Artagnan.

    "PARBLEU!" said Athos.  "But hold out your glass.  Some ham, myboy, or we can't drink."

    "And her brother?" added D'Artagnan, timidly.

    "Her brother?" replied Athos.

    "Yes, the priest."

    "Oh, I inquired after him for the purpose of hanging himlikewise; but he was beforehand with me, he had quit the curacythe night before."

    "Was it ever known who this miserable fellow was?""He was doubtless the first lover and accomplice of the fairlady.  A worthy man, who had pretended to be a curate for thepurpose of getting his mistress married, and securing her aposition.  He has been hanged and quartered, I hope.""My God, my God!" cried D'Artagnan, quite stunned by the relationof this horrible adventure.

    "Taste some of this ham, D'Artagnan; it is exquisite," saidAthos, cutting a slice, which he placed on the young man's plate."What a pity it is there were only four like this in the cellar.I could have drunk fifty bottles more."

    D'Artagnan could no longer endure this conversation, which hadmade him bewildered.  Allowing his head to sink upon his twohands, he pretended to sleep.

    "These young fellows can none of them drink," said Athos, lookingat him with pity, "and yet this is one of the best!"

    28  THE RETURN

    D'Artagnan was astounded by the terrible confidence of Athos; yetmany things appeared very obscure to him in this half revelation.In the first place it had been made by a man quite drunk to onewho was half drunk; and yet, in spite of the incertainty whichthe vapor of three or four bottles of Burgundy carries with it tothe brain, D'Artagnan, when awaking on the following morning, hadall the words of Athos as present to his memory as if they thenfell from his mouth--they had been so impressed upon his mind.All this doubt only gave rise to a more lively desire of arrivingat a certainty, and he went into his friend's chamber with afixed determination of renewing the conversation of the precedingevening; but he found Athos quite himself again--that is to say,the most shrewd and impenetrable of men.  Besides which, theMusketeer, after having exchanged a hearty shake of the hand withhim, broached the matter first.

    "I was pretty drunk yesterday, D'Artagnan," said he, "I can tellthat by my tongue, which was swollen and hot this morning, and bymy pulse, which was very tremulous.  I wager that I uttered athousand extravagances."

    While saying this he looked at his friend with an earnestnessthat embarrassed him.

    "No," replied D'Artagnan, "if I recollect well what you said, itwas nothing out of the common way."

    "Ah, you surprise me.  I thought I had told you a most lamentablestory."  And he looked at the young man as if he would read thebottom of his heart.

    "My faith," said D'Artagnan, "it appears that I was more drunkthan you, since I remember nothing of the kind."

    Athos did not trust this reply, and he resumed; "you cannot havefailed to remark, my dear friend, that everyone has hisparticular kind of drunkenness, sad or gay.  My drunkenness isalways sad, and when I am thoroughly drunk my mania is to relateall the lugubrious stories which my foolish nurse inculcated intomy brain.  That is my failing--a capital failing, I admit; butwith that exception, I am a good drinker."

    Athos spoke this in so natural a manner that D'Artagnan wasshaken in his conviction.

    "It is that, then," replied the young man, anxious to find outthe truth, "it is that, then, I remember as we remember a dream.We were speaking of hanging."

    "Ah, you see how it is," said Athos, becoming still paler, butyet attempting to laugh; "I was sure it was so--the hanging ofpeople is my nightmare."

    "Yes, yes," replied D'Artagnan.  "I remember now; yes, it wasabout--stop a minute--yes, it was about a woman.""That's it," replied Athos, becoming almost livid; "that is mygrand story of the fair lady, and when I relate that, I must bevery drunk."

    "Yes, that was it," said D'Artagnan, "the story of a tall, fairlady, with blue eyes."

    "Yes, who was hanged."

    "By her husband, who was a nobleman of your acquaintance,"continued D'Artagnan, looking intently at Athos.

    "Well, you see how a man may compromise himself when he does notknow what he says," replied Athos, shrugging his shoulders as ifhe thought himself an object of pity.  "I certainly never willget drunk again, D'Artagnan; it is too bad a habit."D'Artagnan remained silent; and then changing the conversationall at once, Athos said:

    "By the by, I thank you for the horse you have brought me.""Is it to your mind?" asked D'Artagnan.

    "Yes; but it is not a horse for hard work."

    "you are mistaken; I rode him nearly ten leagues in less than anhour and a half, and he appeared no more distressed than if hehad only made the tour of the Place St. Sulpice.""Ah, you begin to awaken my regret."

    "Regret?"

    "Yes; I have parted with him."

    "How?"

    "Why, here is the simple fact.  This morning I awoke at sixo'clock.  You were still fast asleep, and I did not know what todo with myself; I was still stupid from our yesterday's debauch.As I came into the public room, I saw one of our Englishmanbargaining with a dealer for a horse, his own having diedyesterday from bleeding.  I drew near, and found he was bidding ahundred pistoles for a chestnut nag.  'PARDIEU,' said I, 'my goodgentleman, I have a horse to sell, too.' 'Ay, and a very fineone!  I saw him yesterday; your friend's lackey was leading him.''Do you think he is worth a hundred pistoles?' 'Yes!  Will yousell him to me for that sum?' 'No; but I will play for him.''What?' 'At dice.'  No sooner said than done, and I lost thehorse.  Ah, ah!  But please to observe I won back the equipage,'cried Athos.

    D'Artagnan looked much disconcerted.

    "This vexes you?" said Athos.

    "Well, I must confess it does," replied D'Artagnan.  "That horsewas to have identified us in the day of battle.  It was a pledge,a remembrance.  Athos, you have done wrong."

    "But, my dear friend, put yourself in my place," replied theMusketeer.  "I was hipped to death; and still further, upon myhonor, I don't like English horses.  If it is only to berecognized, why the saddle will suffice for that; it is quiteremarkable enough.  As to the horse, we can easily find someexcuse for its disappearance.  Why the devil!  A horse is mortal;suppose mine had had the glanders or the farcy?"

    D'Artagnan did not smile.

    "It vexes me greatly," continued Athos, "that you attach so muchimportance to these animals, for I am not yet at the end of mystory."

    "What else have you done."

    "After having lost my own horse, nine against ten--see how near--I formed an idea of staking yours."

    "Yes; but you stopped at the idea, I hope?"

    "No; for I put it in execution that very minute.""And the consequence?" said D'Artagnan, in great anxiety."I threw, and I lost."

    "What, my horse?"

    "Your horse, seven against eight; a point short--you know theproverb."

    "Athos, you are not in your right senses, I swear.""My dear lad, that was yesterday, when I was telling you sillystories, it was proper to tell me that, and not this morning.  Ilost him then, with all his appointments and furniture.""Really, this is frightful."

    "Stop a minute; you don't know all yet.  I should make anexcellent gambler if I were not too hot-headed; but I was hot-headed, just as if I had been drinking.  Well, I was not hot-headed then--"

    "Well, but what else could you play for?  You had nothing left?"'Oh, yes, my friend; there was still that diamond left whichsparkles on your finger, and which I had observed yesterday.""This diamond!" said D'Artagnan, placing his hand eagerly on hisring.

    "And as I am a connoisseur in such things, having had a few of myown once, I estimated it at a thousand pistoles.""I hope," said D'Artagnan, half dead with fright, "you made nomention of my diamond?"

    "On the contrary, my dear friend, this diamond became our onlyresource; with it I might regain our horses and their harnesses,and even money to pay our expenses on the road."

    "Athos, you make me tremble!" cried D'Artagnan.

    "I mentioned your diamond then to my adversary, who had likewiseremarked it.  What the devil, my dear, do you think you can weara star from heaven on your finger, and nobody observe it?Impossible!"

    "Go on, go on, my dear fellow!" said D'Artagnan; "for upon myhonor, you will kill me with your indifference."

    "We divided, then, this diamond into ten parts of a hundredpistoles each."

    "You are laughing at me, and want to try me!" said D'Artagnan,whom anger began to take by the hair, as Minerva takes Achilles,in the ILLIAD.

    "No, I do not jest, MORDIEU!  I should like to have seen you inmy place!  I had been fifteen days without seeing a human face,and had been left to brutalize myself in the company of bottles.""That was no reason for staking my diamond!" replied D'Artagnan,closing his hand with a nervous spasm.

    "Hear the end.  Ten parts of a hundred pistoles each, in tenthrows, without revenge; in thirteen throws I had lost all--inthirteen throws.  The number thirteen was always fatal to me; itwas on the thirteenth of July that--"

    "VENTREBLEU!" cried D'Artagnan, rising from the table, the storyof the present day making him forget that of the preceding one."Patience!" said Athos; "I had a plan.  The Englishman was anoriginal; I had seen him conversing that morning with Grimaud,and Grimaud had told me that he had made him proposals to enterinto his service.  I staked Grimaud, the silent Grimaud, dividedinto ten portions."

    "Well, what next?" said D'Artagnan, laughing in spite of himself."Grimaud himself, understand; and with the ten parts of Grimaud,which are not worth a ducatoon, I regained the diamond.  Tell me,now, if persistence is not a virtue?"

    "My faith!  But this is droll," cried D'Artagnan, consoled, andholding his sides with laughter.

    "You may guess, finding the luck turned, that I again staked thediamond."

    "The devil!" said D'Artagnan, becoming angry again."I won back your harness, then your horse, then my harness, thenmy horse, and then I lost again.  In brief, I regained yourharness and then mine.  That's where we are.  That was a superbthrow, so I left off there."

    D'Artagnan breathed as if the whole hostelry had been removedfrom his breast.

    "Then the diamond is safe?" said he, timidly.

    "Intact, my dear friend; besides the harness of your Bucephalusand mine."

    "But what is the use of harnesses without horses?""I have an idea about them."

    "Athos, you make me shudder."

    "Listen to me.  You have not played for a long time, D'Artagnan.""And I have no inclination to play."

    "Swear to nothing.  You have not played for a long time, I said;you ought, then, to have a good hand."

    "Well, what then?"

    "Well; the Englishman and his companion are still here.  Iremarked that he regretted the horse furniture very much.  Youappear to think much of your horse.  In your place I would stakethe furniture against the horse."

    "But he will not wish for only one harness."

    "Stake both, PARDIEU!  I am not selfish, as you are.""You would do so?" said D'Artagnan, undecided, so strongly didthe confidence of Athos begin to prevail, in spite of himself."On my honor, in one single throw."

    "But having lost the horses, I am particularly anxious topreserve the harnesses."

    "Stake your diamond, then."

    "This?  That's another matter.  Never, never!"

    "The devil!" said Athos.  "I would propose to you to stakePlanchet, but as that has already been done, the Englishman wouldnot, perhaps, be willing."

    "Decidedly, my dear Athos," said D'Artagnan, "I should likebetter not to risk anything."

    "That's a pity," said Athos, cooly.  "The Englishman isoverflowing with pistoles.  Good Lord, try one throw!  One throwis soon made!"

    "And if I lose?"

    "You will win."

    "But if I lose?"

    "Well, you will surrender the harnesses."

    "Have with you for one throw!" said D'Artagnan.

    Athos went in quest of the Englishman, whom he found in thestable, examining the harnesses with a greedy eye.  Theopportunity was good.  He proposed the conditions--the twoharnesses, either against one horse or a hundred pistoles.  TheEnglishman calculated fast; the two harnesses were worth threehundred pistoles.  He consented.

    D'Artagnan threw the dice with a trembling hand, and turned upthe number three; his paleness terrified Athos, who, however,consented himself with saying, "That's a sad throw, comrade; youwill have the horses fully equipped, monsieur."

    The Englishman, quite triumphant, did not even give himself thetrouble to shake the dice.  He threw them on the table withoutlooking at them, so sure was he of victory; D'Artagnan turnedaside to conceal his ill humor.

    "Hold, hold, hold!" said Athos, wit his quiet tone; "that throwof the dice is extraordinary.  I have not seen such a one fourtimes in my life.  Two aces!"

    The Englishman looked, and was seized with astonishment.D'Artagnan looked, and was seized with pleasure.

    "Yes," continued Athos, "four times only; once at the house ofMonsieur Crequy; another time at my own house in the country, inmy chateau at--when I had a chateau; a third time at Monsieur deTreville's where it surprised us all; and the fourth time at acabaret, where it fell to my lot, and where I lost a hundredlouis and a supper on it."

    "Then Monsieur takes his horse back again," said the Englishman."Certainly," said D'Artagnan.

    "Then there is no revenge?"

    "Our conditions said, 'No revenge,' you will please torecollect."

    "That is true; the horse shall be restored to your lackey,monsieur."

    "A moment," said Athos; "with your permission, monsieur, I wishto speak a word with my friend."

    "Say on."

    Athos drew D'Artagnan aside.

    "Well, Tempter, what more do you want with me?" said D'Artagnan."You want me to throw again, do you not?"

    "No, I would wish you to reflect."

    "On what?"

    "You mean to take your horse?"

    "Without doubt."

    "You are wrong, then.  I would take the hundred pistoles.  Youknow you have staked the harnesses against the horse or a hundredpistoles, at your choice."

    "Yes."

    "Well, then, I repeat, you are wrong.  What is the use of onehorse for us two?  I could not ride behind.  We should look likethe two sons of Anmon, who had lost their brother.  You cannotthink of humiliating me by prancing along by my side on thatmagnificent charger.  For my part, I should not hesitate amoment; I should take the hundred pistoles.  We want money forour return to Paris."

    "I am much attached to that horse, Athos."

    "And there again you are wrong.  A horse slips and injures ajoint; a horse stumbles and breaks his knees to the bone; a horseeats out of a manger in which a glandered horse has eaten.  Thereis a horse, while on the contrary, the hundred pistoles feedtheir master."

    "But how shall we get back?"

    "Upon our lackey's horses, PARDIEU.  Anybody may see by ourbearing that we are people of condition."

    "Pretty figures we shall cut on ponies while Aramis and Porthoscaracole on their steeds."

    "Aramis!  Porthos!" cried Athos, and laughed aloud."What is it?" asked D'Artagnan, who did not at all comprehend thehilarity of his friend.

    "Nothing, nothing!  Go on!"

    "Your advice, then?"

    "To take the hundred pistoles, D'Artagnan.  With the hundredpistoles we can live well to the end of the month.  We haveundergone a great deal of fatigue, remember, and a little restwill do no harm."

    "I rest?  Oh, no, Athos.  Once in Paris, I shall prosecute mysearch for that unfortunate woman!"

    "Well, you may be assured that your horse will not be half soserviceable to you for that purpose as good golden louis.  Takethe hundred pistoles, my friend; take the hundred pistoles!"D'Artagnan only required one reason to be satisfied.  This lastreason appeared convincing.  Besides, he feared that by resistinglonger he should appear selfish in the eyes of Athos.  Heacquiesced, therefore, and chose the hundred pistoles, which theEnglishman paid down on the spot.

    They then determined to depart.  Peace with the landlord, inaddition to Athos's old horse, cost six pistoles.  D'Artagnan andAthos took the nags of Planchet and Grimaud, and the two lackeysstarted on foot, carrying the saddles on their heads.However ill our two friends were mounted, they were soon far inadvance of their servants, and arrived at Creveccoeur.  From adistance they perceived Aramis, seated in a melancholy manner athis window, looking out, like Sister Anne, at the dust in thehorizon.

    "HOLA, Aramis!  What the devil are you doing there?" cried thetwo friends.

    "Ah, is that you, D'Artagnan, and you, Athos?" said the youngman.  "I was reflecting upon the rapidity with which theblessings of this world leave us.  My English horse, which hasjust disappeared amid a cloud of dust, has furnished me with aliving image of the fragility of the things of the earth.  Lifeitself may be resolved into three words:  ERAT, EST, FUIT.""Which means--" said D'Artagnan, who began to suspect the truth."Which means that I have just been duped-sixty louis for a horsewhich by the manner of his gait can do at least five leagues anhour."

    D'Artagnan and Athos laughed aloud.

    "My dear D'Artagnan," said Aramis, "don't be too angry with me, Ibeg.  Necessity has no law; besides, I am the person punished, asthat rascally horsedealer has robbed me of fifty louis, at least.Ah, you fellows are good managers!  You ride on our lackey'shorses, and have your own gallant steeds led along carefully byhand, at short stages."

    At the same instant a market cart, which some minutes before hadappeared upon the Amiens road, pulled up at the inn, and Planchetand Grimaud came out of it with the saddles on their heads.  Thecart was returning empty to Paris, and the two lackeys hadagreed, for their transport, to slake the wagoner's thirst alongthe route.

    "What is this?" said Aramis, on seeing them arrive.  "Nothing butsaddles?"

    "Now do you understand?" said Athos.

    "My friends, that's exactly like me!  I retained my harness byinstinct.  HOLA, Bazin! Bring my new saddle and carry it alongwith those of these gentlemen."

    "And what have you done with your ecclesiastics?" askedD'Artagnan.

    "My dear fellow, I invited them to a dinner the next day,"replied Aramis.  "They have some capital wine here-please toobserve that in passing.  I did my best to make them drunk.  Thenthe curate forbade me to quit my uniform, and the Jesuitentreated me to get him made a Musketeer."

    "Without a thesis?" cried D'Artagnan, "without a thesis?  Idemand the suppression of the thesis."

    "Since then," continued Aramis, "I have lived very agreeably.  Ihave begun a poem in verses of one syllable.  That is ratherdifficult, but the merit in all things consists in thedifficulty.  The matter is gallant.  I will read you the firstcanto.  It has four hundred lines, and lasts a minute.""My faith, my dear Aramis," said D'Artagnan, who detested versesalmost as much as he did Latin, "add to the merit of thedifficulty that of the brevity, and you are sure that your poemwill at least have two merits."

    "You will see," continued Aramis, "that it breathesirreproachable passion.  And so, my friends, we return to Paris?Bravo!  I am ready.  We are going to rejoin that good fellow,Porthos.  So much the better.  You can't think how I have missedhim, the great simpleton.  To see him so self-satisfiedreconciles me with myself.  He would not sell his horse; not fora kingdom!  I think I can see him now, mounted upon his superbanimal and seated in his handsome saddle.  I am sure he will looklike the Great Mogul!"

    They made a halt for an hour to refresh their horses.  Aramisdischarged his bill, placed Bazin in the cart with his comrades,and they set forward to join Porthos.

    They found him up, less pale than when D'Artagnan left him afterhis first visit, and seated at a table on which, though he wasalone, was spread enough for four persons.  This dinner consistedof meats nicely dressed, choice wines, and superb fruit."Ah, PARDIEU!" said he, rising, "you come in the nick of time,gentlemen.  I was just beginning the soup, and you will dine withme."

    "Oh, oh!" said D'Artagnan, "Mousqueton has not caught thesebottles with his lasso.  Besides, here is a piquant FRICANDEAUand a fillet of beef."

    "I am recruiting myself," said Porthos, "I am recruiting myself.Nothing weakens a man more than these devilish strains.  Did youever suffer from a strain, Athos?"

    "Never!  Though I remember, in our affair of the Rue Ferou, Ireceived a sword wound which at the end of fifteen or eighteendays produced the same effect."

    "But this dinner was not intended for you alone, Porthos?" saidAramis.

    "No," said Porthos, "I expected some gentlemen of theneighborhood, who have just sent me word they could not come.You will take their places and I shall not lose by the exchange.HOLA, Mousqueton, seats, and order double the bottles!""Do you know what we are eating here?" said Athos, at the end often minutes.

    "PARDIEU!" replied D'Artagnan, "for my part, I am eating vealgarnished with shrimps and vegetables."

    "And I some lamb chops," said Porthos.

    "And I a plain chicken," said Aramis.

    "You are all mistaken, gentlemen," answered Athos, gravely; "youare eating horse."

    "Eating what?" said D'Artagnan.

    "Horse!" said Aramis, with a grimace of disgust.

    Porthos alone made no reply.

    "Yes, horse.  Are we not eating a horse, Porthos?  And perhapshis saddle, therewith."

    "No, gentlemen, I have kept the harness," said Porthos."My faith," said Aramis, "we are all alike.  One would think wehad tipped the wink."

    "What could I do?" said Porthos.  "This horse made my visitorsashamed of theirs, and I don't like to humiliate people.""Then your duchess is still at the waters?" asked D'Artagnan."Still," replied Porthos.  "And, my faith, the governor of theprovince--one of the gentlemen I expected today--seemed to havesuch a wish for him, that I gave him to him."

    "Gave him?" cried D'Artagnan.

    "My God, yes, GAVE, that is the word," said Porthos; "for theanimal was worth at least a hundred and fifty louis, and thestingy fellow would only give me eighty."

    "Without the saddle?" said Aramis.

    "Yes, without the saddle."

    "You will observe, gentlemen," said Athos, "that Porthos has madethe best bargain of any of us."

    And then commenced a roar of laughter in which they all joined,to the astonishment of poor Porthos; but when he was informed ofthe cause of their hilarity, he shared it vociferously accordingto his custom.

    "There is one comfort, we are all in cash," said D'Artagnan."Well, for my part," said Athos, "I found Aramis's Spanish wineso good that I sent on a hamper of sixty bottles of it in thewagon with the lackeys.  That has weakened my purse.""And I," said Aramis, "imagined that I had given almost my lastsou to the church of Montdidier and the Jesuits of Amiens, withwhom I had made engagements which I ought to have kept.  I haveordered Masses for myself, and for you, gentlemen, which will besaid, gentlemen, for which I have not the least doubt you will bemarvelously benefited."

    "And I," said Porthos, "do you think my strain cost me nothing?--without reckoning Mousqueton's wound, for which I had to have thesurgeon twice a day, and who charged me double on account of thatfoolish Mousqueton having allowed himself a ball in a part whichpeople generally only show to an apothecary; so I advised him totry never to get wounded there any more."

    "Ay, ay!" said Athos, exchanging a smile with D'Artagnan andAramis, "it is very clear you acted nobly with regard to the poorlad; that is like a good master."

    "In short," said Porthos, "when all my expenses are paid, I shallhave, at most, thirty crowns left."

    "And I about ten pistoles," said Aramis.

    "Well, then it appears that we are the Croesuses of the society.How much have you left of your hundred pistoles, D'Artagnan.?""Of my hundred pistoles?  Why, in the first place I gave youfifty."

    "You think so?"

    "PARDIEU!"

    "Ah, that is true.  I recollect."

    "Then I paid the host six."

    "What a brute of a host!  Why did you give him six pistoles?""You told me to give them to him."

    "It is true; I am too good-natured.  In brief, how much remains?""Twenty-five pistoles," said D'Artagnan.

    "And I," said Athos, taking some small change from his pocket,I--"

    "You?  Nothing!"

    "My faith!  So little that it is not worth reckoning with thegeneral stock."

    "Now, then, let us calculate how much we posses in all.""Porthos?"

    "Thirty crowns."

    "Aramis?"

    "Ten pistoles."

    "And you, D'Artagnan?"

    "Twenty-five."

    "That makes in all?" said Athos.

    "Four hundred and seventy-five livres," said D'Artagnan, whoreckoned like Archimedes.

    "On our arrival in Paris, we shall still have four hundred,besides the harnesses," said Porthos.

    "But our troop horses?" said Aramis.

    "Well, of the four horses of our lackeys we will make two for themasters, for which we will draw lots.  With the four hundredlivres we will make the half of one for one of the unmounted, andthen we will give the turnings out of our pockets to D'Artagnan,who has a steady hand, and will go and play in the first gaminghouse we come to.  There!"

    "Let us dine, then," said Porthos; "it is getting cold."The friends, at ease with regard to the future, did honor to therepast, the remains of which were abandoned to Mousqueton, Bazin,Planchet, and Grimaud.

    On arriving in Paris, D'Artagnan found a letter from M. deTreville, which informed him that, at his request, the king hadpromised that he should enter the company of the Musketeers.As this was the height of D'Artagnan's worldly ambition--apart,be it well understood, from his desire of finding Mme.Bonacieux--he ran, full of joy, to seek his comrades, whom he hadleft only half an hour before, but whom he found very sad anddeeply preoccupied.  They were assembled in council at theresidence of Athos, which always indicated an event of somegravity.  M. de Treville had intimated to them his Majesty'sfixed intention to open the campaign on the first of May, andthey must immediately prepare their outfits.

    The four philosophers looked at one another in a state ofbewilderment.  M. de Treville never jested in matters relating todiscipline.

    "And what do you reckon your outfit will cost?" said D'Artagnan."Oh, we can scarcely say.  We have made our calculations withSpartan economy, and we each require fifteen hundred livres.""Four times fifteen makes sixty--six thousand livres," saidAthos.

    "It seems to me," said D'Artagnan, "with a thousand livres each--I do not speak as a Spartan, but as a procurator--"This word PROCURATOR roused Porthos.  "Stop," said he, "I have anidea."

    "Well, that's something, for I have not the shadow of one," saidAthos cooly; "but as to D'Artagnan, gentlemen, the idea ofbelonging to OURS has driven him out of his senses.  A thousandlivres!  For my part, I declare I want two thousand.""Four times two makes eight," then said Aramis; "it is eightthousand that we want to complete our outfits, toward which, itis true, we have already the saddles."

    "Besides," said Athos, waiting till D'Artagnan, who went to thankMonsieur de Treville, had shut the door, "besides, there is thatbeautiful ring which beams from the finger of our friend.  Whatthe devil!  D'Artagnan is too good a comrade to leave hisbrothers in embarrassment while he wears the ransom of a king onhis finger."

    29  HUNTING FOR THE EQUIPMENTS

    The most preoccupied of the four friends was certainlyD'Artagnan, although he, in his quality of Guardsman, would bemuch more easily equipped than Messieurs the Musketeers, who wereall of high rank; but our Gascon cadet was, as may have beenobserved, of a provident and almost avaricious character, andwith that (explain the contradiction) so vain as almost to rivalPorthos.  To this preoccupation of his vanity, D'Artagnan at thismoment joined an uneasiness much less selfish.  Notwithstandingall his inquiries respecting Mme. Bonacieux, he could obtain nointelligence of her.  M. de Treville had spoken of her to thequeen.  The queen was ignorant where the mercer's young wife was,but had promised to have her sought for; but this promise wasvery vague and did not at all reassure D'Artagnan.Athos did not leave his chamber; he made up his mind not to takea single step to equip himself.

    "We have still fifteen days before us," said he to his friends."well, if at the end of a fortnight I have found nothing, orrather if nothing has come to find me, as I a, too good aCatholic to kill myself with a pistol bullet, I will seek a goodquarrel with four of his Eminence's Guards or with eightEnglishmen, and I will fight until one of them has killed me,which, considering the number, cannot fail to happen.  It willthen be said of me that I died for the king; so that I shall haveperformed my duty without the expense of an outfit."Porthos continued to walk about with his hands behind him,tossing his head and repeating, "I shall follow up on my idea."Aramis, anxious and negligently dressed, said nothing.It may be seen by these disastrous details that desolationreigned in the community.

    The lackeys on their part, like the coursers of Hippolytus,shared the sadness of their masters.  Mousqueton collected astore of crusts; Bazin, who had always been inclined to devotion,never quit the churches; Planchet watched the flight of flies;and Grimaud, whom the general distress could not induce to breakthe silence imposed by his master, heaved sighs enough to softenthe stones.

    The three friends--for, as we have said, Athos had sworn not tostir a foot to equip himself--went out early in the morning, andreturned late at night.  They wandered about the streets, lookingat the pavement a if to see whether the passengers had not left apurse behind them.  They might have been supposed to be followingtracks, so observant were they wherever they went.  When they metthey looked desolately at one another, as much as to say, "Haveyou found anything?"

    However, as Porthos had first found an idea, and had thought ofit earnestly afterward, he was the first to act.  He was a man ofexecution, this worthy Porthos.  D'Artagnan perceived him one daywalking toward the church of St. Leu, and followed himinstinctively.  He entered, after having twisted his mustache andelongated his imperial, which always announced on his part themost triumphant resolutions.  As D'Artagnan took some precautionsto conceal himself, Porthos believed he had not been seen.D'Artagnan entered behind him.  Porthos went and leaned againstthe side of a pillar.  D'Artagnan, still unperceived, supportedhimself against the other side.

    There happened to be a sermon, which made the church very full ofpeople.  Porthos took advantage of this circumstance to ogle thewomen.  Thanks to the cares of Mousqueton, the exterior was forfrom announcing the distress of the interior.  His hat was alittle napless, his feather was a little faded, his gold lace wasa little tarnished, his laces were a trifle frayed; but in theobscurity of the church these things were not seen, and Porthoswas still the handsome Porthos.

    D'Artagnan observed, on the bench nearest to the pillar againstwhich Porthos leaned, sort of ripe beauty, rather yellow andrather dry, but erect and haughty under her black hood.  The eyesof Porthos were furtively cast upon this lady, and then rovedabout at large over the nave.

    On her side the lady, who from time to time blushed, darted withthe rapidity of lightning a glance toward the inconstant Porthos;and then immediately the eyes of Porthos wandered anxiously.  Itwas plain that this mode of proceeding piqued the lady in theblack hood, for she bit her lips till they bled, scratched theend of her nose, and could not sit still in her seat.Porthos, seeing this, retwisted his mustache, elongated hisimperial a second time, and began to make signals to a beautifullady who was near the choir, and who not only was a beautifullady, but still further, no doubt, a great lady--for she hadbehind her a Negro boy who had brought the cushion on which sheknelt, and a female servant who held the emblazoned bag in whichwas placed the book from which she read the Mass.The lady with the black hood followed through all theirwanderings the looks of Porthos, and perceived that they restedupon the lady with the velvet cushion, the little Negro, and themaid-servant.

    During this time Porthos played close.  It was almostimperceptible motions of his eyes, fingers placed upon the lips,little assassinating smiles, which really did assassinate thedisdained beauty.

    Then she cried, "Ahem!" under cover of the MEA CULPA, strikingher breast so vigorously that everybody, even the lady with thered cushion, turned round toward her.  Porthos paid no attention.Nevertheless, he understood it all, but was deaf.The lady with the red cushion produced a great effect--for shewas very handsome--upon the lady with he black hood, who saw inher a rival really to be dreaded; a great effect upon Porthos,who thought her much prettier than the lady with the black hood;a great effect upon D'Artagnan, who recognized in her the lady ofMeung, of Calais, and of Dover, whom his persecutor, the man withthe scar, had saluted by the name of Milady.

    D'Artagnan, without losing sight of the lady of the red cushion,continued to watch the proceedings of Porthos, which amused himgreatly.  He guessed that the lady of the black hood was theprocurator's wife of the Rue aux Ours, which was the moreprobable from the church of St. Leu being not far from thatlocality.

    He guessed, likewise, by induction, that Porthos was taking hisrevenge for the defeat of Chantilly, when the procurator's wifehad proved so refractory with respect to her purse.Amid all this, D'Artagnan remarked also that not one countenanceresponded to the gallantries of Porthos.  There were onlychimeras and illusions; but for real love, for true jealousy, isthere any reality except illusions and chimeras?

    The sermon over, the procurator's wife advanced toward the holyfont.  Porthos went before her, and instead of a finger, dippedhis whole hand in.  The procurator's wife smiled, thinking thatit was for her Porthos had put himself to this trouble; but shewas cruelly and promptly undeceived.  When she was only aboutthree steps from him, he turned his head round, fixing his eyessteadfastly upon the lady with the red cushion, who had risen andwas approaching, followed by her black boy and her woman.When the lady of the red cushion came close to Porthos, Porthosdrew his dripping hand from the font.  The fair worshippertouched the great hand of Porthos with her delicate fingers,smiled, made the sign of the cross, and left the church.This was too much for the procurator's wife; she doubted notthere was an intrigue between this lady and Porthos.  If she hadbeen a great lady she would have fainted; but as she was only aprocurator's wife, she contented herself saying to the Musketeerwith concentrated fury, "Eh, Monsieur Porthos, you don't offer meany holy water?"

    Porthos, at the sound of that voice, started like a man awakenedfrom a sleep of a hundred years.

    "Ma-madame!" cried he; "is that you?  How is your husband, ourdear Monsieur Coquenard?  Is he still as stingy as ever?  Wherecan my eyes have been not to have seen you during the two hoursof the sermon?"

    "I was within two paces of you, monsieur," replied theprocurator's wife; "but you did not perceive me because you hadno eyes but for the pretty lady to whom you just now gave theholy water."

    Porthos pretended to be confused.  "Ah," said he, "you haveremarked--"

    "I must have been blind not to have seen."

    "Yes," said Porthos, "that is a duchess of my acquaintance whim Ihave great trouble to meet on account of the jealousy of herhusband, and who sent me word that she should come today to thispoor church, buried in this vile quarter, solely for the sake ofseeing me."

    "Monsieur Porthos," said the procurator's wife, "will you havethe kindness to offer me your arm for five minutes?  I havesomething to say to you."

    "Certainly, madame," said Porthos, winking to himself, as agambler does who laughs at the dupe he is about to pluck.At that moment D'Artagnan passed in pursuit of Milady; he cast apassing glance at Porthos, and beheld this triumphant look."Eh, eh!" said he, reasoning to himself according to thestrangely easy morality of that gallant period, "there is one whowill be equipped in good time!"

    Porthos, yielding to the pressure of the arm of the procurator'swife, as a bark yields to the rudder, arrived at the cloister St.Magloire--a little-frequented passage, enclosed with a turnstileat each end.  In the daytime nobody was seen there but mendicantsdevouring their crusts, and children at play.

    "Ah, Monsieur Porthos," cried the procurator's wife, when she wasassured that no one who was a stranger to the population of thelocality could either see or hear her, "ah, Monsieur Porthos, youare a great conqueror, as it appears!"

    "I, madame?" said Porthos, drawing himself up proudly; "how so?""The signs just now, and the holy water!  But that must be aprincess, at least--that lady with her Negro boy and her maid!""My God!  Madame, you are deceived," said Porthos; "she is simplya duchess."

    "And that running footman who waited at the door, and thatcarriage with a coachman in grand livery who sat waiting on hisseat?"

    Porthos had seen neither the footman nor the carriage, but withhe eye of a jealous woman, Mme. Coquenard had seen everything.Porthos regretted that he had not at once made the lady of thered cushion a princess.

    "Ah, you are quite the pet of the ladies, Monsieur Porthos!"resumed the procurator's wife, with a sigh.

    "Well," responded Porthos, "you may imagine, with the physiquewith which nature has endowed me, I am not in want of good luck.""Good Lord, how quickly men forget!" cried the procurator's wife,raising her eyes toward heaven.

    "Less quickly than the women, it seems to me," replied Porthos;"for I, madame, I may say I was your victim, when wounded, dying,I was abandoned by the surgeons.  I, the offspring of a noblefamily, who placed reliance upon your friendship--I was neardying of my wounds at first, and of hunger afterward, in abeggarly inn at Chantilly, without you ever deigning once toreply to the burning letters I addressed to you.""But, Monsieur Porthos," murmured the procurator's wife, whobegan to feel that, to judge by the conduct of the great ladiesof the time, she was wrong.

    "I, who had sacrificed for you the Baronne de--"

    "I know it well."

    "The Comtesse de--"

    "Monsieur Porthos, be generous!"

    "You are right, madame, and I will not finish."

    "But it was my husband who would not hear of lending.""Madame Coquenard," said Porthos, "remember the first letter youwrote me, and which I preserve engraved in my memory."The procurator's wife uttered a groan.

    "Besides," said she, "the sum you required me to borrow wasrather large."

    "Madame Coquenard, I gave you the preference.  I had but to writeto the Duchesse--but I won't repeat her name, for I am incapableof compromising a woman; but this I know, that I had but to writeto her and she would have sent me fifteen hundred."The procurator's wife shed a tear.

    "Monsieur Porthos," said she, "I can assure you that you haveseverely punished me; and if in the time to come you should findyourself in a similar situation, you have but to apply to me.""Fie, madame, fie!" said Porthos, as if disgusted.  "Let us nottalk about money, if you please; it is humiliating.""Then you no longer love me!" said the procurator's wife, slowlyand sadly.

    Porthos maintained a majestic silence.

    "And that is the only reply you make?  Alas, I understand.""Think of the offense you have committed toward me, madame!  Itremains HERE!" said Porthos, placing his hand on his heart, andpressing it strongly.

    "I will repair it, indeed I will, my dear Porthos.""Besides, what did I ask of you?" resumed Porthos, with amovement of the shoulders full of good fellowship.  "A loan,nothing more!  After all, I am not an unreasonable man.  I knowyou are not rich, Madame Coquenard, and that your husband isobliged to bleed his poor clients to squeeze a few paltry crownsfrom them.  Oh!  If you were a duchess, a marchioness, or acountess, it would be quite a different thing; it would beunpardonable."

    The procurator's wife was piqued.

    "Please to know, Monsieur Porthos," said she, "that my strongbox,the strongbox of a procurator's wife though if may be, is betterfilled than those of your affected minxes."

    "The doubles the offense," said Porthos, disengaging his arm fromthat of the procurator's wife; "for if you are rich, MadameCoquenard, then there is no excuse for your refusal.""When I said rich," replied the procurator's wife, who saw thatshe had gone too far, "you must not take the word literally.  Iam not precisely rich, though I am pretty well off.""Hold, madame," said Porthos, "let us say no more upon thesubject, I beg of you.  You have misunderstood me, all sympathyis extinct between us."

    "Ingrate that you are!"

    "Ah!  I advise you to complain!" said Porthos.

    "Begone, then, to your beautiful duchess; I will detain you nolonger."

    "And she is not to be despised, in my opinion."

    "Now, Monsieur Porthos, once more, and this is the last!  Do youlove me still?"

    "Ah, madame," said Porthos, in the most melancholy tone he couldassume, "when we are about to enter upon a campaign--a campaign,in which my presentiments tell me I shall be killed--""Oh, don't talk of such things!" cried the procurator's wife,bursting into tears.

    "Something whispers me so," continued Porthos, becoming more andmore melancholy.

    "Rather say that you have a new love."

    "Not so; I speak frankly to you.  No object affects me; and Ieven feel here, at the bottom of my heart, something which speaksfor you.  But in fifteen days, as you know, or as you do notknow, this fatal campaign is to open.  I shall be fearfullypreoccupied with my outfit.  Then I must make a journey to see myfamily, in the lower part of Brittany, to obtain the sumnecessary for my departure."

    Porthos observed a last struggle between love and avarice."And as," continued he, "the duchess whom you saw at the churchhas estates near to those of my family, we mean to make thejourney together.  Journeys, you know, appear much shorter whenwe travel two in company."

    "Have you no friends in Paris, then, Monsieur Porthos?" said theprocurator's wife.

    "I thought I had," said Porthos, resuming his melancholy air;"but I have been taught my mistake."

    "You have some!" cried the procurator's wife, in a transport thatsurprised even herself.  "Come to our house tomorrow.  You arethe son of my aunt, consequently my cousin; you come from Noyon,in Picardy; you have several lawsuits and no attorney.  Can yourecollect all that?"

    "Perfectly, madame."

    "Cone at dinnertime."

    "Very well."

    "And be upon your guard before my husband, who is rather shrewd,notwithstanding his seventy-six years."

    "Seventy-six years!  PESTE!  That's a fine age!" replied Porthos."A great age, you mean, Monsieur Porthos.  Yes, the poor man maybe expected to leave me a widow, any hour," continued she,throwing a significant glance at Porthos.  "Fortunately, by ourmarriage contract, the survivor takes everything.""All?"

    "Yes, all."

    "You are a woman of precaution, I see, my dear Madame Coquenard,"said Porthos, squeezing the hand of the procurator's wifetenderly.

    "We are then reconciled, dear Monsieur Porthos?" said she,simpering.

    "For life," replied Porthos, in the same manner.

    "Till we meet again, then, dear traitor!"

    "Till we meet again, my forgetful charmer!"

    "Tomorrow, my angel!"

    "Tomorrow, flame of my life!"

    30  D'ARTAGNAN AND THE ENGLISHMAN

    D'Artagnan followed Milady without being perceived by her.He saw her get into her carriage, and heard her order thecoachman to drive to St. Germain.

    It was useless to try to keep pace on foot with a carriagedrawn by two powerful horses. D'Artagnan therefore returnedto the Rue Ferou.

    In the Rue de Seine he met Planchet, who had stopped beforethe house of a pastry cook, and was contemplating withecstasy a cake of the most appetizing appearance.He ordered him to go and saddle two horses in M. deTreville's stables--one for himself, D'Artagnan, and one forPlanchet--and bring them to Athens's place.  Once for all,Treville had placed his stable at D'Artagnan's service.Planchet proceeded toward the Rue du Colombier, andD'Artagnan toward the Rue Ferou.  Athos was at home,emptying sadly a bottle of the famous Spanish wine he hadbrought back with him from his journey into Picardy.  Hemade a sign for Grimaud to bring a glass for D'Artagnan, andGrimaud obeyed as usual.

    D'Artagnan related to Athos all that had passed at thechurch between Porthos and the procurator's wife, and howtheir comrade was probably by that time in a fair way to beequipped.

    "As for me," replied Athos to this recital, "I am quite atmy ease; it will not be women that will defray the expenseof my outfit."

    "Handsome, well-bred, noble lord as you are, my dear Athos,neither princesses nor queens would be secure from youramorous solicitations."

    "How young this D'Artagnan is!" said Athos, shrugging hisshoulders; and he made a sign to Grimaud to bring anotherbottle.

    At that moment Planchet put his head modestly in at thehalf-open door, and told his master that the horses wereready.

    "What horses?" asked Athos.

    "Two horses that Monsieur de Treville lends me at mypleasure, and with which I am now going to take a ride toSt. Germain."

    "Well, and what are you going to do at St. Germain?" thendemanded Athos.

    Then D'Artagnan described the meeting which he had at thechurch, and how he had found that lady who, with theseigneur in the black cloak and with the scar near histemple, filled his mind constantly.

    "That is to say, you are in love with this lady as you werewith Madame Bonacieux," said Athos, shrugging his shoulderscontemptuously, as if he pitied human weakness.

    "I? not at all!" said D'Artagnan.  "I am only curious tounravel the mystery to which she is attached.  I do not knowwhy, but I imagine that this woman, wholly unknown to me asshe is, and wholly unknown to her as I am, has an influenceover my life."

    "Well, perhaps you are right," said Athos.  "I do not know awoman that is worth the trouble of being sought for when sheis once lost.  Madame Bonacieux is lost; so much the worsefor her if she is found."

    "No, Athos, no, you are mistaken," said D'Artagnan; "I lovemy poor Constance more than ever, and if I knew the place inwhich she is, were it at the end of the world, I would go tofree her from the hands of her enemies; but I am ignorant.All my researches have been useless.  What is to be said?  Imust divert my attention!"

    "Amuse yourself with Milady, my dear D'Artagnan; I wish youmay with all my heart, if that will amuse you."

    "Hear me, Athos," said D'Artagnan.  "Instead of shuttingyourself up here as if you were under arrest, get onhorseback and come and take a ride with me to St. Germain.""My dear fellow," said Athos, "I ride horses when I haveany; when I have none, I go afoot."

    "Well," said D'Artagnan, smiling at the misanthropy ofAthos, which from any other person would have offended him,"I ride what I can get; I am not so proud as you.  So AUREVOIR, dear Athos."

    "AU REVOIR," said the Musketeer, making a sign to Grimaud touncork the bottle he had just brought.

    D'Artagnan and Planchet mounted, and took the road to St.Germain.

    All along the road, what Athos had said respecting Mme.Bonacieux recurred to the mind of the young man.  AlthoughD'Artagnan was not of a very sentimental character, themercer's pretty wife had made a real impression upon hisheart.  As he said, he was ready to go to the end of theworld to seek her; but the world, being round, has manyends, so that he did not know which way to turn. Meantime,he was going to try to find out Milady.  Milady had spokento the man in the black cloak; therefore she knew him. Now,in the opinion of D'Artagnan, it was certainly the man inthe black cloak who had carried off Mme. Bonacieux thesecond time, as he had carried her off the first.D'Artagnan then only half-lied, which is lying but little,when he said that by going in search of Milady he at thesame time went in search of Constance.

    Thinking of all this, and from time to time giving a touchof the spur to his horse, D'Artagnan completed his shortjourney, and arrived at St. Germain.  He had just passed bythe pavilion in which ten years later Louis XIV was born.He rode up a very quiet street, looking to the right and theleft to see if he could catch any vestige of his beautifulEnglishwoman, when from the ground floor of a pretty house,which, according to the fashion of the time, had no windowtoward the street, he saw a face peep out with which hethought he was acquainted.  This person walked along theterrace, which was ornamented with flowers.  Planchetrecognized him first.

    "Eh, monsieur!" said he, addressing D'Artagnan, "don't youremember that face which is blinking yonder?"

    "No," said D'Artagnan, "and yet I am certain it is not thefirst time I have seen that visage."

    "PARBLEU, I believe it is not," said Planchet.  "Why, it ispoor Lubin, the lackey of the Comte de Wardes--he whom youtook such good care of a month ago at Calais, on the road tothe governor's country house!"

    "So it is!" said D'Artagnan; "I know him now.  Do you thinkhe would recollect you?"

    "My faith, monsieur, he was in such trouble that I doubt ifhe can have retained a very clear recollection of me.""Well, go and talk with the boy," said D'Artagnan, "and makeout if you can from his conversation whether his master isdead."

    Planchet dismounted and went straight up to Lubin, who didnot at all remember him, and the two lackeys began to chatwith the best understanding possible; while D'Artagnanturned the two horses into a lane, went round the house, andcame back to watch the conference from behind a hedge offilberts.

    At the end of an instant's observation he heard the noise ofa vehicle, and saw Milady's carriage stop opposite to him.He could not be mistaken; Milady was in it.  D'Artagnanleaned upon the neck of his horse, in order that he mightsee without being seen.

    Milady put her charming blond head out at the window, andgave her orders to her maid.

    The latter--a pretty girl of about twenty or twenty-twoyears, active and lively, the true SOUBRETTE of a greatlady--jumped from the step upon which, according to thecustom of the time, she was seated, and took her way towardthe terrace upon which D'Artagnan had perceived Lubin.D'Artagnan followed the soubrette with his eyes, and saw hergo toward the terrace; but it happened that someone in thehouse called Lubin, so that Planchet remained alone, lookingin all directions for the road where D'Artagnan had disappeared.The maid approached Planchet, whom she took for Lubin, andholding out a little billet to him said, "For your master.""For my master?" replied Planchet, astonished.

    "Yes, and important.  Take it quickly."

    Thereupon she ran toward the carriage, which had turnedround toward the way it came, jumped upon the step, and thecarriage drove off.

    Planchet turned and returned the billet.  Then, accustomedto passive obedience, he jumped down from the terrace, rantoward the lane, and at the end of twenty paces metD'Artagnan, who, having seen all, was coming to him."For you, monsieur," said Planchet, presenting the billet tothe young man.

    "For me?" said D'Artagnan; "are you sure of that?""PARDIEU, monsieur, I can't be more sure.  The SOUBRETTE said,'For your master.' I have no other master but you; so-a pretty little lass, my faith, is that SOUBRETTE!"D'Artagnan opened the letter, and read these words:

    "A person who takes more interest in you than she is willingto confess wishes to know on what day it will suit you towalk in the forest?  Tomorrow, at the Hotel Field of theCloth of Gold, a lackey in black and red will wait for yourreply."

    "Oh!" said D'Artagnan, "this is rather warm; it appears thatMilady and I are anxious about the health of the sameperson. Well, Planchet, how is the good Monsieur de Wardes?He is not dead, then?"

    "No, monsieur, he is as well as a man can be with four swordwounds in his body; for you, without question, inflictedfour upon the dear gentleman, and he is still very weak,having lost almost all his blood.  As I said, monsieur,Lubin did not know me, and told me our adventure from oneend to the other."

    "Well done, Planchet! you are the king of lackeys.  Now jumponto your horse, and let us overtake the carriage."This did not take long.  At the end of five minutes theyperceived the carriage drawn up by the roadside; a cavalier,richly dressed, was close to the door.

    The conversation between Milady and the cavalier was soanimated that D'Artagnan stopped on the other side of thecarriage without anyone but the pretty SOUBRETTE perceivinghis presence.

    The conversation took place in English--a language whichD'Artagnan could not understand; but by the accent the youngman plainly saw that the beautiful Englishwoman was in agreat rage.  She terminated it by an action which left nodoubt as to the nature of this conversation; this was a blowwith her fan, applied with such force that the littlefeminine weapon flew into a thousand pieces.

    The cavalier laughed aloud, which appeared to exasperateMilady still more.

    D'Artagnan thought this was the moment to interfere.  Heapproached the other door, and taking off his hatrespectfully, said, "Madame, will you permit me to offer youmy services?  It appears to me that this cavalier has madeyou very angry.  Speak one word, madame, and I take uponmyself to punish him for his want of courtesy."

    At the first word Milady turned, looking at the young manwith astonishment; and when he had finished, she said invery good French, "Monsieur, I should with great confidenceplace myself under your protection if the person with whom Iquarrel were not my brother."

    "Ah, excuse me, then," said D'Artagnan.  "You must be awarethat I was ignorant of that, madame."

    "What is that stupid fellow troubling himself about?" criedthe cavalier whom Milady had designated as her brother,stooping down to the height of the coach window.  "Why doesnot he go about his business?"

    "Stupid fellow yourself!" said D'Artagnan, stooping in histurn on the neck of his horse, and answering on his sidethrough the carriage window.  "I do not go on because itpleases me to stop here."

    The cavalier addressed some words in English to his sister."I speak to you in French," said D'Artagnan; "be kindenough, then, to reply to me in the same language.  You areMadame's brother, I learn--be it so; but fortunately you arenot mine."

    It might be thought that Milady, timid as women are ingeneral, would have interposed in this commencement ofmutual provocations in order to prevent the quarrel fromgoing too far; but on the contrary, she threw herself backin her carriage, and called out coolly to the coachman,"Go on--home!"

    The pretty SOUBRETTE cast an anxious glance at D'Artagnan,whose good looks seemed to have made an impression on her.The carriage went on, and left the two men facing eachother; no material obstacle separated them.

    The cavalier made a movement as if to follow the carriage;but D'Artagnan, whose anger, already excited, was muchincreased by recognizing in him the Englishman of Amiens whohad won his horse and had been very near winning his diamondof Athos, caught at his bridle and stopped him.

    "Well, monsieur," said he, "you appear to be more stupidthan I am, for you forget there is a little quarrel toarrange between us two."

    "Ah," said the Englishman, "is it you, my master?  It seemsyou must always be playing some game or other."

    "Yes; and that reminds me that I have a revenge to take.  Wewill see, my dear monsieur, if you can handle a sword asskillfully as you can a dice box."

    "You see plainly that I have no sword," said the Englishman."Do you wish to play the braggart with an unarmed man?""I hope you have a sword at home; but at all events, I havetwo, and if you like, I will throw with you for one ofthem."

    "Needless," said the Englishman; "I am well furnished withsuch playthings."

    "Very well, my worthy gentleman," replied D'Artagnan, "pickout the longest, and come and show it to me this evening.""Where, if you please?"

    "Behind the Luxembourg; that's a charming spot for suchamusements as the one I propose to you."

    "That will do; I will be there."

    "Your hour?"

    "Six o'clock."

    "A PROPOS, you have probably one or two friends?""I have three, who would be honored by joining in the sportwith me."

    "Three?  Marvelous!  That falls out oddly! Three is just mynumber!"

    "Now, then, who are you?" asked the Englishman.

    "I am Monsieur D'Artagnan, a Gascon gentleman, serving inthe king's Musketeers.  And you?"

    "I am Lord de Winter, Baron Sheffield."

    "Well, then, I am your servant, Monsieur Baron," saidD'Artagnan, "though you have names rather difficult torecollect."  And touching his horse with the spur, hecantered back to Paris.  As he was accustomed to do in allcases of any consequence, D'Artagnan went straight to theresidence of Athos.

    He found Athos reclining upon a large sofa, where he waswaiting, as he said, for his outfit to come and find him.He related to Athos all that had passed, except the letterto M. de Wardes.

    Athos was delighted to find he was going to fight anEnglishman. We might say that was his dream.

    They immediately sent their lackeys for Porthos and Aramis,and on their arrival made them acquainted with thesituation.

    Porthos drew his sword from the scabbard, and made passes atthe wall, springing back from time to time, and makingcontortions like a dancer.

    Aramis, who was constantly at work at his poem, shut himselfup in Athos's closet, and begged not to be disturbed beforethe moment of drawing swords.

    Athos, by signs, desired Grimaud to bring another bottle ofwine.

    D'Artagnan employed himself in arranging a little plan, ofwhich we shall hereafter see the execution, and whichpromised him some agreeable adventure, as might be seen bythe smiles which from time to time passed over hiscountenance, whose thoughtfulness they animated.

    31  ENGLISH AND FRENCH

    The hour having come, they went with their four lackeys to aspot behind the Luxembourg given up to the feeding of goats.Athos threw a piece of money to the goalkeeper to withdraw.The lackeys were ordered to act as sentinels.

    A silent party soon drew near to the same enclosure,entered, and joined the Musketeers.  Then, according toforeign custom, the presentations took place.

    The Englishmen were all men of rank; consequently the oddnames of their adversaries were for them not only a matterof surprise, but of annoyance.

    "But after all," said Lord de Winter, when the three friendshad been named, "we do not know who you are.  We cannotfight with such names; they are names of shepherds.""Therefore your lordship may suppose they are only assumednames," said Athos.

    "Which only gives us a greater desire to know the realones," replied the Englishman.

    "You played very willingly with us without knowing ournames," said Athos, "by the same token that you won ourhorses."

    "That is true, but we then only risked our pistoles; thistime we risk our blood.  One plays with anybody; but onefights only with equals."

    "And that is but just," said Athos, and he took aside theone of the four Englishmen with whom he was to fight, andcommunicated his name in a low voice.

    Porthos and Aramis did the same.

    "Does that satisfy you?" said Athos to his adversary.  "Doyou find me of sufficient rank to do me the honor ofcrossing swords with me?"

    "Yes, monsieur," said the Englishman, bowing.

    "Well! now tell I tell you something?" added Athos, coolly."What?" replied the Englishman.

    "Why, that is that you would have acted much more wisely ifyou had not required me to make myself known."

    "Why so?"

    "Because I am believed to be dead, and have reasons forwishing nobody to know I am living; so that I shall beobliged to kill you to prevent my secret from roaming overthe fields."

    The Englishman looked at Athos, believing that he jested,but Athos did not jest the least in the world.

    "Gentlemen," said Athos, addressing at the same time hiscompanions and their adversaries, "are we ready?""Yes!" answered the Englishmen and the Frenchmen, as withone voice.

    "On guard, then!" cried Athos.

    Immediately eight swords glittered in the rays of thesetting sun, and the combat began with an animosity verynatural between men twice enemies.

    Athos fenced with as much calmness and method as if he hadbeen practicing in a fencing school.

    Porthos, abated, no doubt, of his too-great confidence byhis adventure of Chantilly, played with skill and prudence.Aramis, who had the third canto of his poem to finish,behaved like a man in haste.

    Athos killed his adversary first.  He hit him but once, butas he had foretold, that hit was a mortal one; the swordpierced his heart.

    Second, Porthos stretched his upon the grass with a woundthrough his thigh, As the Englishman, without making anyfurther resistance, then surrendered his sword, Porthos tookhim up in his arms and bore him to his carriage.

    Aramis pushed his so vigorously that after going back fiftypaces, the man ended by fairly taking to his heels, anddisappeared amid the hooting of the lackeys.

    As to D'Artagnan, he fought purely and simply on thedefensive; and when he saw his adversary pretty wellfatigued, with a vigorous side thrust sent his sword flying.The baron, finding himself disarmed, took two or three stepsback, but in this movement his foot slipped and he fellbackward.

    D'Artagnan was over him at a bound, and said to theEnglishman, pointing his sword to his throat, "I could killyou, my Lord, you are completely in my hands; but I spareyour life for the sake of your sister."

    D'Artagnan was at the height of joy; he had realized theplan he had imagined beforehand, whose picturing hadproduced the smiles we noted upon his face.

    The Englishman, delighted at having to do with a gentlemanof such a kind disposition, pressed D'Artagnan in his arms,and paid a thousand compliments to the three Musketeers, andas Porthos's adversary was already installed in thecarriage, and as Aramis's had taken to his heels, they hadnothing to think about but the dead.

    As Porthos and Aramis were undressing him, in the hope offinding his wound not mortal, a large purse dropped from hisclothes. D'Artagnan picked it up and offered it to Lord deWinter.

    "What the devil would you have me do with that?" said theEnglishman.

    "You can restore it to his family," said D'Artagnan."His family will care much about such a trifle as that!  Hisfamily will inherit fifteen thousand louis a year from him.Keep the purse for your lackeys."

    D'Artagnan put the purse into his pocket.

    "And now, my young friend, for you will permit me, I hope,to give you that name," said Lord de Winter, "on this veryevening, if agreeable to you, I will present you to mysister, Milady Clarik, for I am desirous that she shouldtake you into her good graces; and as she is not in bad odorat court, she may perhaps on some future day speak a wordthat will not prove useless to you.

    D'Artagnan blushed with pleasure, and bowed a sign ofassent.

    At this time Athos came up to D'Artagnan.

    "What do you mean to do with that purse?" whispered he."Why, I meant to pass it over to you, my dear Athos.""Me! why to me?"

    "Why, you killed him!  They are the spoils of victory.""I, the heir of an enemy!" said Athos; "for whom, then, doyou take me?"

    "It is the custom in war," said D'Artagnan, "why should itnot be the custom in a duel?"

    "Even on the field of battle, I have never done that."Porthos shrugged his shoulders; Aramis by a movement of hislips endorsed Athos.

    "Then," said D'Artagnan, "let us give the money to thelackeys, as Lord de Winter desired us to do."

    "Yes," said Athos; "let us give the money to the lackeys--notto our lackeys, but to the lackeys of the Englishmen."Athos took the purse, and threw it into the hand of thecoachman.  "For you and your comrades."

    This greatness of spirit in a man who was quite destitutestruck even Porthos; and this French generosity, repeated byLord de Winter and his friend, was highly applauded, exceptby MM. Grimaud, Bazin, Mousqueton and Planchet.

    Lord de Winter, on quitting D'Artagnan, gave him hissister's address.  She lived in the Place Royale--then thefashionable quarter--at Number 6, and he undertook to calland take D'Artagnan with him in order to introduce him.D'Artagnan appointed eight o'clock at Athos's residence.This introduction to Milady Clarik occupied the head of ourGascon greatly.  He remembered in what a strange manner thiswoman had hitherto been mixed up in his destiny.  Accordingto his conviction, she was some creature of the cardinal,and yet he felt himself invincibly drawn toward her by oneof those sentiments for which we cannot account.  His onlyfear was that Milady would recognize in him the man of Meungand of Dover.  Then she knew that he was one of the friendsof M. de Treville, and consequently, that he belonged bodyand soul to the king; which would make him lose a part ofhis advantage, since when known to Milady as he knew her, heplayed only an equal game with her.  As to the commencementof an intrigue between her and M.  de Wardes, ourpresumptuous hero gave but little heed to that, although themarquis was young, handsome, rich, and high in thecardinal's favor.  It is not for nothing we are but twenty years old, above all if we were born at Tarbes.D'Artagnan began by making his most splendid toilet, thenreturned to Athos's, and according to custom, relatedeverything to him.  Athos listened to his projects, thenshook his head, and recommended prudence to him with a shadeof bitterness.

    "What!" said he, "you have just lost one woman, whom youcall good, charming, perfect; and here you are, runningheadlong after another."

    D'Artagnan felt the truth of this reproach.

    "I loved Madame Bonacieux with my heart, while I only loveMilady with my head," said he.  "In getting introduced toher, my principal object is to ascertain what part she playsat court."

    "The part she plays, PARDIEU!  It is not difficult to divinethat, after all you have told me.  She is some emissary ofthe cardinal; a woman who will draw you into a snare inwhich you will leave your head."

    "The devil! my dear Athos, you view things on the dark side,methinks."

    "My dear fellow, I mistrust women.  Can it be otherwise?  Ibought my experience dearly--particularly fair women.  Miladyis fair, you say?"

    "She has the most beautiful light hair imaginable!""Ah, my poor D'Artagnan!" said Athos.

    "Listen to me! I want to be enlightened on a subject; then,when I shall have learned what I desire to know, I willwithdraw."

    "Be enlightened!" said Athos, phlegmatically.

    Lord de Winter arrived at the appointed time; but Athos,being warned of his coming, went into the other chamber.  Hetherefore found D'Artagnan alone, and as it was nearly eighto'clock he took the young man with him.

    An elegant carriage waited below, and as it was drawn by twoexcellent horses, they were soon at the Place Royale.Milady Clarik received D'Artagnan ceremoniously.  Her hotelwas remarkably sumptuous, and while the most part of theEnglish had quit, or were about to quit, France on accountof the war, Milady had just been laying out much money uponher residence; which proved that the general measure whichdrove the English from France did not affect her."You see," said Lord de Winter, presenting D'Artagnan to hissister, "a young gentleman who has held my life in hishands, and who has not abused his advantage, although wehave been twice enemies, although it was I who insulted him,and although I am an Englishman.  Thank him, then, madame,if you have any affection for me."

    Milady frowned slightly; a scarcely visible cloud passedover her brow, and so peculiar a smile appeared upon herlips that the young man, who saw and observed this tripleshade, almost shuddered at it.

    The brother did not perceive this; he had turned round toplay with Milady's favorite monkey, which had pulled him bythe doublet.

    "You are welcome, monsieur," said Milady, in a voice whosesingular sweetness contrasted with the symptoms of ill-humorwhich D'Artagnan had just remarked; "you have today acquiredeternal rights to my gratitude."

    The Englishman then turned round and described the combatwithout omitting a single detail.  Milady listened with thegreatest attention, and yet it was easily to be perceived,whatever effort she made to conceal her impressions, thatthis recital was not agreeable to her.  The blood rose toher head, and her little foot worked with impatience beneathher robe.

    Lord de Winter perceived nothing of this.  When he hadfinished, he went to a table upon which was a salver withSpanish wine and glasses.  He filled two glasses, and by asign invited D'Artagnan to drink.

    D'Artagnan knew it was considered disobliging by anEnglishman to refuse to pledge him.  He therefore drew nearto the table and took the second glass.  He did not,however, lose sight of Milady, and in a mirror he perceivedthe change that came over her face. Now that she believedherself to be no longer observed, a sentiment resemblingferocity animated her countenance.  She bit her handkerchiefwith her beautiful teeth.

    That pretty little SOUBRETTE whom D'Artagnan had alreadyobserved then came in.  She spoke some words to Lord deWinter in English, who thereupon requested D'Artagnan'spermission to retire, excusing himself on account of theurgency of the business that had called him away, andcharging his sister to obtain his pardon.

    D'Artagnan exchanged a shake of the hand with Lord deWinter, and then returned to Milady.  Her countenance, withsurprising mobility, had recovered its gracious expression;but some little red spots on her handkerchief indicated thatshe had bitten her lips till the blood came.  Those lipswere magnificent; they might be said to be of coral.The conversation took a cheerful turn.  Milady appeared tohave entirely recovered.  She told D'Artagnan that Lord deWinter was her brother-in-law, and not her brother.  She hadmarried a younger brother of the family, who had left her awidow with one child.  This child was the only heir to Lordde Winter, if Lord de Winter did not marry.  All this showedD'Artagnan that there was a veil which concealed something;but he could not yet see under this veil.

    In addition to this, after a half hour's conversationD'Artagnan was convinced that Milady was his compatriot; shespoke French with an elegance and a purity that left nodoubt on that head.

    D'Artagnan was profuse in gallant speeches and protestationsof devotion.  To all the simple things which escaped ourGascon, Milady replied with a smile of kindness.  The hourcame for him to retire.  D'Artagnan took leave of Milady,and left the saloon the happiest of men.

    On the staircase he met the pretty SOUBRETTE, who brushedgently against him as she passed, and then, blushing to theeyes, asked his pardon for having touched him in a voice sosweet that the pardon was granted instantly.

    D'Artagnan came again on the morrow, and was still betterreceived than on the evening before.  Lord de Winter was notat home; and it was Milady who this time did all the honorsof the evening.  She appeared to take a great interest inhim, asked him whence he came, who were his friends, andwhether he had not sometimes thought of attaching himself tothe cardinal.

    D'Artagnan, who, as we have said, was exceedingly prudentfor a young man of twenty, then remembered his suspicionsregarding Milady.  He launched into a eulogy of hisEminence, and said that he should not have failed to enterinto the Guards of the cardinal instead of the king's Guardsif he had happened to know M. de Cavois instead of M. deTreville.

    Milady changed the conversation without any appearance ofaffectation, and asked D'Artagnan in the most carelessmanner possible if he had ever been in England.

    D'Artagnan replied that he had been sent thither by M. deTreville to treat for a supply of horses, and that he hadbrought back four as specimens.

    Milady in the course of the conversation twice or thrice bither lips; she had to deal with a Gascon who played close.At the same hour as on the preceding evening, D'Artagnanretired. In the corridor he again met the pretty Kitty; thatwas the name of the SOUBRETTE.  She looked at him with anexpression of kindness which it was impossible to mistake;but D'Artagnan was so preoccupied by the mistress that henoticed absolutely nothing but her.

    D'Artagnan came again on the morrow and the day after that,and each day Milady gave him a more gracious reception.Every evening, either in the antechamber, the corridor, oron the stairs, he met the pretty SOUBRETTE.  But, as we havesaid, D'Artagnan paid no attention to this persistence ofpoor Kitty.

    32  A PROCURATOR'S DINNER

    However brilliant had been the part played by Porthos in theduel, it had not made him forget the dinner of theprocurator's wife.

    On the morrow he received the last touches of Mousqueton'sbrush for an hour, and took his way toward the Rue aux Ourswith the steps of a man who was doubly in favor withfortune.

    His heart beat, but not like D'Artagnan's with a young andimpatient love.  No; a more material interest stirred hisblood.  He was about at last to pass that mysteriousthreshold, to climb those unknown stairs by which, one byone, the old crowns of M. Coquenard had ascended.  He wasabout to see in reality a certain coffer of which he hadtwenty times beheld the image in his dreams--a coffer longand deep, locked, bolted, fastened in the wall; a coffer ofwhich he had so often heard, and which the hands--a littlewrinkled, it is true, but still not without elegance--of theprocurator's wife were about to open to his admiring looks.And then he--a wanderer on the earth, a man without fortune,a man without family, a soldier accustomed to inns,cabarets, taverns, and restaurants, a lover of wine forcedto depend upon chance treats--was about to partake of familymeals, to enjoy the pleasures of a comfortable

    establishment, and to give himself up to those littleattentions which "the harder one is, the more they please,"as old soldiers say.

    To come in the capacity of a cousin, and seat himself everyday at a good table; to smooth the yellow, wrinkled brow ofthe old procurator; to pluck the clerks a little by teachingthem BASSETTE, PASSE-DIX, and LANSQUENET, in their utmostnicety, and winning from them, by way of fee for the lessonhe would give them in an hour, their savings of a month--allthis was enormously delightful to Porthos.

    The Musketeer could not forget the evil reports which thenprevailed, and which indeed have survived them, of theprocurators of the period--meanness, stinginess, fasts; butas, after all, excepting some few acts of economy whichPorthos had always found very unseasonable, the procurator'swife had been tolerably liberal--that is, be it understood,for a procurator's wife--he hoped to see a household of ahighly comfortable kind.

    And yet, at the very door the Musketeer began to entertainsome doubts.  The approach was not such as to prepossesspeople--an ill-smelling, dark passage, a staircase half-lighted by bars through which stole a glimmer from aneighboring yard; on the first floor a low door studded withenormous nails, like the principal gate of the GrandChatelet.

    Porthos knocked with his hand.  A tall, pale clerk, his faceshaded by a forest of virgin hair, opened the door, andbowed with the air of a man forced at once to respect inanother lofty stature, which indicated strength, themilitary dress, which indicated rank, and a ruddycountenance, which indicated familiarity with good living.A shorter clerk came behind the first, a taller clerk behindthe second, a stripling of a dozen years rising behind thethird.  In all, three clerks and a half, which, for thetime, argued a very extensive clientage.

    Although the Musketeer was not expected before one o'clock,the procurator's wife had been on the watch ever sincemidday, reckoning that the heart, or perhaps the stomach, ofher lover would bring him before his time.

    Mme. Coquenard therefore entered the office from the houseat the same moment her guest entered from the stairs, andthe appearance of the worthy lady relieved him from anawkward embarrassment.  The clerks surveyed him with greatcuriosity, and he, not knowing well what to say to thisascending and descending scale, remained tongue-tied."It is my cousin!" cried the procurator's wife.  "Come in,come in, Monsieur Porthos!"

    The name of Porthos produced its effect upon the clerks, whobegan to laugh; but Porthos turned sharply round, and everycountenance quickly recovered its gravity.

    They reached the office of the procurator after havingpassed through the antechamber in which the clerks were, andthe study in which they ought to have been.  This lastapartment was a sort of dark room, littered with papers.  Onquitting the study they left the kitchen on the right, andentered the reception room.

    All these rooms, which communicated with one another, didnot inspire Porthos favorably.  Words might be heard at adistance through all these open doors.  Then, while passing,he had cast a rapid, investigating glance into the kitchen;and he was obliged to confess to himself, to the shame ofthe procurator's wife and his own regret, that he did notsee that fire, that animation, that bustle, which when agood repast is on foot prevails generally in that sanctuaryof good living.

    The procurator had without doubt been warned of his visit,as he expressed no surprise at the sight of Porthos, whoadvanced toward him with a sufficiently easy air, andsaluted him courteously.

    "We are cousins, it appears, Monsieur Porthos?" said theprocurator, rising, yet supporting his weight upon the armsof his cane chair.

    The old man, wrapped in a large black doublet, in which thewhole of his slender body was concealed, was brisk and dry.His little gray eyes shone like carbuncles, and appeared,with his grinning mouth, to be the only part of his face inwhich life survived.  Unfortunately the legs began to refusetheir service to this bony machine.  During the last five orsix months that this weakness had been felt, the worthyprocurator had nearly become the slave of his wife.The cousin was received with resignation, that was all.  M.Coquenard, firm upon his legs, would have declined allrelationship with M. Porthos.

    "Yes, monsieur, we are cousins," said Porthos, without beingdisconcerted, as he had never reckoned upon being receivedenthusiastically by the husband.

    "By the female side, I believe?" said the procurator,maliciously.

    Porthos did not feel the ridicule of this, and took it for apiece of simplicity, at which he laughed in his largemustache.  Mme. Coquenard, who knew that a simple-mindedprocurator was a very rare variety in the species, smiled alittle, and colored a great deal.

    M. Coquenard had, since the arrival of Porthos, frequentlycast his eyes with great uneasiness upon a large chestplaced in front of his oak desk.  Porthos comprehended thatthis chest, although it did not correspond in shape withthat which he had seen in his dreams, must be the blessedcoffer, and he congratulated himself that the reality wasseveral feet higher than the dream.

    M. Coquenard did not carry his genealogical investigationsany further; but withdrawing his anxious look from the chestand fixing it upon Porthos, he contented himself with saying,"Monsieur our cousin will do us the favor of dining with usonce before his departure for the campaign, will he not,Madame Coquenard?"

    This time Porthos received the blow right in his stomach,and felt it.  It appeared likewise that Mme. Coquenard wasnot less affected by it on her part, for she added, "Mycousin will not return if he finds that we do not treat himkindly; but otherwise he has so little time to pass in Paris,and consequently to spare to us, that we must entreat him togive us every instant he can call his own previous to hisdeparture."

    "Oh, my legs, my poor legs! where are you?" murmuredCoquenard, and he tried to smile.

    This succor, which came to Porthos at the moment in which hewas attacked in his gastronomic hopes, inspired muchgratitude in the Musketeer toward the procurator's wife.The hour of dinner soon arrived.  They passed into the eatingroom--a large dark room situated opposite the kitchen.The clerks, who, as it appeared, had smelled unusual perfumesin the house, were of military punctuality, and held theirstools in hand quite ready to sit down.  Their jaws movedpreliminarily with fearful threatenings.

    "Indeed!" thought Porthos, casting a glance at the three hungryclerks-for the errand boy, as might be expected, was notadmitted to the honors of the magisterial table.  "in mycousin's place, I would not keep such gourmands!  They looklike shipwrecked sailors who have not eaten for six weeks."M. Coquenard entered, pushed along upon his armchair withcasters by Mme. Coquenard, whom Porthos assisted in rollingher husband up to the table.  He had scarcely entered whenhe began to agitate his nose and his jaws after the exampleof his clerks.

    "Oh, oh!" said he; "here is a soup which is ratherinviting."

    "What the devil can they smell so extraordinary in thissoup?" said Porthos, at the sight of a pale liquid, abundantbut entirely free from meat, on the surface of which a fewcrusts swam about as rare as the islands of an archipelago.Mme. Coquenard smiled, and upon a sign from her everyoneeagerly took his seat.

    M. Coquenard was served first, then Porthos.  Afterward Mme.Coquenard filled her own plate, and distributed the crustswithout soup to the impatient clerks.  At this moment thedoor of the dining room unclosed with a creak, and Porthosperceived through the half-open flap the little clerk who,not being allowed to take part in the feast, ate his drybread in the passage with the double odor of the dining roomand kitchen.

    After the soup the maid brought a boiled fowl--a piece ofmagnificence which caused the eyes of the diners to dilatein such a manner that they seemed ready to burst."One may see that you love your family, Madame Coquenard,"said the procurator, with a smile that was almost tragic."You are certainly treating your cousin very handsomely!"The poor fowl was thin, and covered with one of those thick,bristly skins through which the teeth cannot penetrate withall their efforts.  The fowl must have been sought for along time on the perch, to which it had retired to die ofold age.

    "The devil!" thought Porthos, "this is poor work.  I respectold age, but I don't much like it boiled or roasted."And he looked round to see if anybody partook of hisopinion; but on the contrary, he saw nothing but eager eyeswhich were devouring, in anticipation, that sublime fowlwhich was the object of his contempt.

    Mme. Coquenard drew the dish toward her, skillfully detachedthe two great black feet, which she placed upon herhusband's plate, cut off the neck, which with the head sheput on one side for herself, raised the wing for Porthos,and then returned the bird otherwise intact to the servantwho had brought it in, who disappeared with it before theMusketeer had time to examine the variations whichdisappointment produces upon faces, according to thecharacters and temperaments of those who experience it.In the place of the fowl a dish of haricot beans made itsappearance--an enormous dish in which some bones of muttonthat at first sight one might have believed to have somemeat on them pretended to show themselves.

    But the clerks were not the dupes of this deceit, and theirlugubrious looks settled down into resigned countenances.Mme. Coquenard distributed this dish to the young men withthe moderation of a good housewife.

    The time for wine came.  M. Coquenard poured from a verysmall stone bottle the third of a glass for each of theyoung men, served himself in about the same proportion, andpassed the bottle to Porthos and Mme. Coquenard.

    The young men filled up their third of a glass with water;then, when they had drunk half the glass, they filled it upagain, and continued to do so.  This brought them, by theend of the repast, to swallowing a drink which from thecolor of the ruby had passed to that of a pale topaz.Porthos ate his wing of the fowl timidly, and shuddered whenhe felt the knee of the procurator's wife under the table,as it came in search of his.  He also drank half a glass ofthis sparingly served wine, and found it to be nothing butthat horrible Montreuil--the terror of all expert palates.M. Coquenard saw him swallowing this wine undiluted, andsighed deeply.

    "Will you eat any of these beans, Cousin Porthos?" said Mme.Coquenard, in that tone which says, "Take my advice, don'ttouch them."

    "Devil take me if I taste one of them!" murmured Porthos tohimself, and then said aloud, "Thank you, my cousin, I am nolonger hungry."

    There was silence.  Porthos could hardly keep hiscountenance.

    The procurator repeated several times, "Ah, MadameCoquenard!  Accept my compliments; your dinner has been areal feast.  Lord, how I have eaten!"

    M. Coquenard had eaten his soup, the black feet of the fowl,and the only mutton bone on which there was the leastappearance of meat.

    Porthos fancied they were mystifying him, and began to curlhis mustache and knit his eyebrows; but the knee of Mme.Coquenard gently advised him to be patient.

    This silence and this interruption in serving, which wereunintelligible to Porthos, had, on the contrary, a terriblemeaning for the clerks.  Upon a look from the procurator,accompanied by a smile from Mme. Coquenard, they aroseslowly from the table, folded their napkins more slowlystill, bowed, and retired.

    "Go, young men! go and promote digestion by working," saidthe procurator, gravely.

    The clerks gone, Mme. Coquenard rose and took from a buffeta piece of cheese, some preserved quinces, and a cake whichshe had herself made of almonds and honey.

    M. Coquenard knit his eyebrows because there were too manygood things.  Porthos bit his lips because he saw not thewherewithal to dine.  He looked to see if the dish of beanswas still there; the dish of beans had disappeared."A positive feast!" cried M. Coquenard, turning about in hischair, "a real feast, EPULCE EPULORUM.  Lucullus dines withLucullus."

    Porthos looked at the bottle, which was Dear him, and hopedthat with wine, bread, and cheese, he might make a dinner;but wine was wanting, the bottle was empty.  M. and Mme.Coquenard did not seem to observe it.

    "This is fine!" said Porthos to himself; "I am prettilycaught!"

    He passed his tongue over a spoonful of preserves, and stuckhis teeth into the sticky pastry of Mme. Coquenard."Now," said he, "the sacrifice is consummated!  Ah! if I hadnot the hope of peeping with Madame Coquenard into herhusband's chest!"

    M. Coquenard, after the luxuries of such a repast, which hecalled an excess, felt the want of a siesta.  Porthos beganto hope that the thing would take place at the presentsitting, and in that same locality; but the procurator wouldlisten to nothing, he would be taken to his room, and wasnot satisfied till he was close to his chest, upon the edgeof which, for still greater precaution, he placed his feet.The procurator's wife took Porthos into an adjoining room,and they began to lay the basis of a reconciliation."You can come and dine three times a week," said Mme.Coquenard.

    "Thanks, madame!" said Porthos, "but I don't like to abuseyour kindness; besides, I must think of my outfit!""That's true," said the procurator's wife, groaning, "thatunfortunate outfit!"

    "Alas, yes," said Porthos, "it is so."

    "But of what, then, does the equipment of your companyconsist, Monsieur Porthos?"

    "Oh, of many things!" said Porthos.  "The Musketeers are, asyou know, picked soldiers, and they require many thingsuseless to the Guardsmen or the Swiss."

    "But yet, detail them to me."

    "Why, they may amount to--", said Porthos, who preferreddiscussing the total to taking them one by one.

    The procurator's wife waited tremblingly.

    "To how much?" said she.  "I hope it does not exceed--" Shestopped; speech failed her.

    "Oh, no," said Porthos, "it does not exceed two thousandfive hundred livres!  I even think that with economy I couldmanage it with two thousand livres."

    "Good God!" cried she, "two thousand livres! Why, that is afortune!"

    Porthos made a most significant grimace; Mme. Coquenardunderstood it.

    "I wished to know the detail," said she, "because, havingmany relatives in business, I was almost sure of obtainingthings at a hundred per cent less than you would payyourself."

    "Ah, ah!" said Porthos, "that is what you meant to say!""Yes, dear Monsieur Porthos.  Thus, for instance, don't youin the first place want a horse?"

    "Yes, a horse."

    "Well, then!  I can just suit you."

    "Ah!" said Porthos, brightening, "that's well as regards myhorse; but I must have the appointments complete, as theyinclude objects which a Musketeer alone can purchase, andwhich will not amount, besides, to more than three hundredlivres."

    "Three hundred livres?  Then put down three hundred livres,"said the procurator's wife, with a sigh.

    Porthos smiled.  It may be remembered that he had the saddlewhich came from Buckingham.  These three hundred livres hereckoned upon putting snugly into his pocket.

    "Then," continued he, "there is a horse for my lackey, andmy valise.  As to my arms, it is useless to trouble youabout them; I have them."

    "A horse for your lackey?" resumed the procurator's wife,hesitatingly; "but that is doing things in lordly style, myfriend."

    "Ah, madame!" said Porthos, haughtily; "do you take me for abeggar?"

    "No; I only thought that a pretty mule makes sometimes asgood an appearance as a horse, and it seemed to me that bygetting a pretty mule for Mousqueton--"

    "Well, agreed for a pretty mule," said Porthos; "you areright, I have seen very great Spanish nobles whose wholesuite were mounted on mules.  But then you understand,Madame Coquenard, a mule with feathers and bells.""Be satisfied," said the procurator's wife.

    "There remains the valise," added Porthos.

    "Oh, don't let that disturb you," cried Mme. Coquenard.  "Myhusband has five or six valises; you shall choose the best.There is one in particular which he prefers in his journeys,large enough to hold all the world."

    "Your valise is then empty?" asked Porthos, with simplicity."Certainly it is empty," replied the procurator's wife, inreal innocence.

    "Ah, but the valise I want," cried Porthos, "is a well-filled one, my dear."

    Madame uttered fresh sighs.  Moliere had not written hisscene in "L'Avare" then.  Mme. Coquenard was in the dilemmaof Harpagan.

    Finally, the rest of the equipment was successively debatedin the same manner; and the result of the sitting was thatthe procurator's wife should give eight hundred livres inmoney, and should furnish the horse and the mule whichshould have the honor of carrying Porthos and Mousqueton toglory.

    These conditions being agreed to, Porthos took leave of Mme.Coquenard.  The latter wished to detain him by dartingcertain tender glances; but Porthos urged the commands ofduty, and the procurator's wife was obliged to give place tothe king.

    The Musketeer returned home hungry and in bad humor.

    33  SOUBRETTE AND MISTRESS

    Meantime, as we have said, despite the cries of hisconscience and the wise counsels of Athos, D'Artagnan becamehourly more in love with Milady.  Thus he never failed topay his diurnal court to her; and the self-satisfied Gasconwas convinced that sooner or later she could not fail torespond.

    One day, when he arrived with his head in the air, and aslight at heart as a man who awaits a shower of gold, hefound the SOUBRETTE under the gateway of the hotel; but thistime the pretty Kitty was not contented with touching him ashe passed, she took him gently by the hand.

    "Good!" thought D'Artagnan, "She is charged with somemessage for me from her mistress; she is about to appointsome rendezvous of which she had not courage to speak."  Andhe looked down at the pretty girl with the most triumphantair imaginable.

    "I wish to say three words to you, Monsieur Chevalier,"stammered the SOUBRETTE.

    "Speak, my child, speak," said D'Artagnan; "I listen.""Here?  Impossible!  That which I have to say is too long,and above all, too secret."

    "Well, what is to be done?"

    "If Monsieur Chevalier would follow me?" said Kitty,timidly.

    "Where you please, my dear child."

    "Come, then."

    And Kitty, who had not let go the hand of D'Artagnan, ledhim up a little dark, winding staircase, and after ascendingabout fifteen steps, opened a door.

    "Come in here, Monsieur Chevalier," said she; "here we shallbe alone, and can talk."

    "And whose room is this, my dear child?"

    "It is mine, Monsieur Chevalier; it communicates with mymistress's by that door.  But you need not fear.  She willnot hear what we say; she never goes to bed beforemidnight,"

    D'Artagnan cast a glance around him.  The little apartmentwas charming for its taste and neatness; but in spite ofhimself, his eyes were directed to that door which Kittysaid led to Milady's chamber.

    Kitty guessed what was passing in the mind of the young man,and heaved a deep sigh.

    "You love my mistress, then, very dearly, MonsieurChevalier?" said she.

    "Oh, more than I can say, Kitty! I am mad for her!"Kitty breathed a second sigh.

    "Alas, monsieur," said she, "that is too bad."

    "What the devil do you see so bad in it?" said D'Artagnan."Because, monsieur," replied Kitty, "my mistress loves younot at all."

    "HEIN!" said D'Artagnan, "can she have charged you to tellme so?"

    "Oh, no, monsieur; but out of the regard I have for you, Ihave taken the resolution to tell you so."

    "Much obliged, my dear Kitty; but for the intention only--forthe information, you must agree, is not likely to be at allagreeable."

    "That is to say, you don't believe what I have told you; isit not so?"

    "We have always some difficulty in believing such things, mypretty dear, were it only from self-love."

    "Then you don't believe me?"

    "I confess that unless you deign to give me some proof ofwhat you advance--"

    "What do you think of this?"

    Kitty drew a little note from her bosom.

    "For me?" said Derogation, seizing the letter.

    "No; for another."

    "For another?"

    "Yes."

    "His name; his name!" cried D'Artagnan.

    "Read the address."

    "Monsieur El Comte de Wardes."

    The remembrance of the scene at St. Germain presented itselfto the mind of the presumptuous Gascon.  As quick asthought, he tore open the letter, in spite of the cry whichKitty uttered on seeing what he was going to do, or rather,what he was doing.

    "Oh, good Lord, Monsieur Chevalier," said she, "what are youdoing?"

    "I?" said D'Artagnan; "nothing," and he read,

    "You have not answered my first note.  Are you indisposed,or have you forgotten the glances you favored me with at theball of Mme. de Guise?  You have an opportunity now, Count;do not allow it to escape."

    D'Artagnan became very pale; he was wounded in his SELF-love: he thought that it was in his LOVE.

    "Poor dear Monsieur D'Artagnan," said Kitty, in a voice fullof compassion, and pressing anew the young man's hand."You pity me, little one?" said D'Artagnan.

    "Oh, yes, and with all my heart; for I know what it is to bein love."

    "You know what it is to be in love?" said D'Artagnan,looking at her for the first time with much attention."Alas, yes."

    "Well, then, instead of pitying me, you would do much betterto assist me in avenging myself on your mistress.""And what sort of revenge would you take?"

    "I would triumph over her, and supplant my rival.""I will never help you in that, Monsieur Chevalier," saidKitty, warmly.

    "And why not?" demanded D'Artagnan.

    "For two reasons."

    "What ones?"

    "The first is that my mistress will never love you.""How do you know that?"

    "You have cut her to the heart."

    "I? In what can I have offended her--I who ever since I haveknown her have lived at her feet like a slave?  Speak, I begyou!"

    "I will never confess that but to the man--who should read tothe bottom of my soul!"

    D'Artagnan looked at Kitty for the second time.  The younggirl had freshness and beauty which many duchesses wouldhave purchased with their coronets.

    "Kitty," said he, "I will read to the bottom of your soulwhen-ever you like; don't let that disturb you." And he gaveher a kiss at which the poor girl became as red as a cherry."Oh, no," said Kitty, "it is not me you love!  It is mymistress you love; you told me so just now."

    "And does that hinder you from letting me know the secondreason?"

    "The second reason, Monsieur the Chevalier," replied Kitty,emboldened by the kiss in the first place, and still furtherby the expression of the eyes of the young man, "is that inlove, everyone for herself!"

    Then only D'Artagnan remembered the languishing glances ofKitty, her constantly meeting him in the antechamber, thecorridor, or on the stairs, those touches of the hand everytime she met him, and her deep sighs; but absorbed by hisdesire to please the great lady, he had disdained thesoubrette.  He whose game is the eagle takes no heed of thesparrow.

    But this time our Gascon saw at a glance all the advantageto be derived from the love which Kitty had just confessedso innocently, or so boldly: the interception of lettersaddressed to the Comte de Wardes, news on the spot, entranceat all hours into Kitty's chamber, which was contiguous toher mistress's.  The perfidious deceiver was, as may plainlybe perceived, already sacrificing, in intention, the poorgirl in order to obtain Milady, willy-nilly.

    "Well," said he to the young girl, "are you willing, my dearKitty, that I should give you a proof of that love which youdoubt?"

    "What love?" asked the young girl.

    "Of that which I am ready to feel toward you."

    "And what is that proof?"

    "Are you willing that I should this evening pass with youthe time I generally spend with your mistress?"

    "Oh, yes," said Kitty, clapping her hands, "very willing.""Well, then, come here, my dear," said D'Artagnan,establishing himself in an easy chair; "come, and let metell you that you are the prettiest SOUBRETTE I ever saw!"And he did tell her so much, and so well, that the poorgirl, who asked nothing better than to believe him, didbelieve him. Nevertheless, to D'Artagnan's great

    astonishment, the pretty Kitty defended herself resolutely.Time passes quickly when it is passed in attacks anddefenses.  Midnight sounded, and almost at the same time thebell was rung in Milady's chamber.

    "Good God," cried Kitty, "there is my mistress calling me!Go; go directly!"

    D'Artagnan rose, took his hat, as if it had been hisintention to obey, then, opening quickly the door of a largecloset instead of that leading to the staircase, he buriedhimself amid the robes and dressing gowns of Milady."What are you doing?" cried Kitty.

    D'Artagnan, who had secured the key, shut himself up in thecloset without reply.

    "Well," cried Milady, in a sharp voice.  "Are you asleep,that you don't answer when I ring?"

    And D'Artagnan heard the door of communication openedviolently.

    "Here am I, Milady, here am I!" cried Kitty, springingforward to meet her mistress.

    Both went into the bedroom, and as the door of communicationremained open, D'Artagnan could hear Milady for some timescolding her maid.  She was at length appeased, and theconversation turned upon him while Kitty was assisting hermistress.

    "Well," said Milady, "I have not seen our Gascon thisevening."

    "What, Milady! has he not come?" said Kitty.  "Can he beinconstant before being happy?"

    "Oh, no; he must have been prevented by Monsieur de Trevilleor Monsieur Dessessart.  I understand my game, Kitty; I havethis one safe."

    "What will you do with him, madame?"

    "What will I do with him?  Be easy, Kitty, there issomething between that man and me that he is quite ignorantof: he nearly made me lose my credit with his Eminence. Oh,I will be revenged!"

    "I believed that Madame loved him."

    "I love him?  I detest him! An idiot, who held the life ofLord de Winter in his bands and did not kill him, by which Imissed three hundred thousand livres' income."

    "That's true," said Kitty; "your son was the only heir ofhis uncle, and until his majority you would have had theenjoyment of his fortune."

    D'Artagnan shuddered to the marrow at hearing this suavecreature reproach him, with that sharp voice which she tooksuch pains to conceal in conversation, for not having killeda man whom he had seen load her with kindnesses.

    "For all this," continued Milady, "I should long ago haverevenged myself on him if, and I don't know why, thecardinal had not requested me to conciliate him.""Oh, yes; but Madame has not conciliated that little womanhe was so fond of."

    "What, the mercer's wife of the Rue des Fossoyeurs?  Has henot already forgotten she ever existed?  Fine vengeancethat, on my faith!"

    A cold sweat broke from D'Artagnan's brow.  Why, this womanwas a monster! He resumed his listening, but unfortunatelythe toilet was finished.

    "That will do," said Milady; "go into your own room, andtomorrow endeavor again to get me an answer to the letter Igave you."

    "For Monsieur de Wardes?" said Kitty.

    "To be sure; for Monsieur de Wardes."

    "Now, there is one," said Kitty, "who appears to me quite adifferent sort of a man from that poor Monsieur D'Artagnan.""Go to bed, mademoiselle," said Milady; "I don't likecomments."

    D'Artagnan heard the door close; then the noise of two boltsby which Milady fastened herself in.  On her side, but assoftly as possible, Kitty turned the key of the lock, andthen D'Artagnan opened the closet door.

    "Oh, good Lord!" said Kitty, in a low voice, "what is thematter with you?  How pale you are!"

    "The abominable creature" murmured D'Artagnan.

    "Silence, silence, begone!" said Kitty.  "There is nothingbut a wainscot between my chamber and Milady's; every wordthat is uttered in one can be heard in the other.""That's exactly the reason I won't go," said D'Artagnan."What!" said Kitty, blushing.

    "Or, at least, I will go--later."

    He drew Kitty to him.  She had the less motive to resist,resistance would make so much noise.  Therefore Kittysurrendered.

    It was a movement of vengeance upon Milady.  D'Artagnanbelieved it right to say that vengeance is the pleasure ofthe gods.  With a little more heart, he might have beencontented with this new conquest; but the principal featuresof his character were ambition and pride.  It must, however,be confessed in his justification that the first use he madeof his influence over Kitty was to try and find out what hadbecome of Mme. Bonacieux; but the poor girl swore upon thecrucifix to D'Artagnan that she was entirely ignorant onthat head, her mistress never admitting her into half hersecrets--only she believed she could say she was not dead.As to the cause which was near making Milady lose her creditwith the cardinal, Kitty knew nothing about it; but thistime D'Artagnan was better informed than she was.  As he hadseen Milady on board a vessel at the moment he was leavingEngland, he suspected that it was, almost without a doubt,on account of the diamond studs.

    But what was clearest in all this was that the true hatred,the profound hatred, the inveterate hatred of Milady, wasincreased by his not having killed her brother-in-law.D'Artagnan came the next day to Milady's, and finding her ina very ill-humor, had no doubt that it was lack of an answerfrom M. de Wardes that provoked her thus.  Kitty came in,but Milady was very cross with her.  The poor girl ventureda glance at D'Artagnan which said, "See how I suffer on youraccount!"

    Toward the end of the evening, however, the beautifullioness became milder; she smilingly listened to the softspeeches of D'Artagnan, and even gave him her hand to kiss.D'Artagnan departed, scarcely knowing what to think, but ashe was a youth who did not easily lose his head, whilecontinuing to pay his court to Milady, he had framed alittle plan in his mind.

    He found Kitty at the gate, and, as on the precedingevening, went up to her chamber.  Kitty had been accused ofnegligence and severely scolded.  Milady could not at allcomprehend the silence of the Comte de Wardes, and sheordered Kitty to come at nine o'clock in the morning to takea third letter.

    D'Artagnan made Kitty promise to bring him that letter onthe following morning.  The poor girl promised all her loverdesired; she was mad.

    Things passed as on the night before.  D'Artagnan concealedhimself in his closet; Milady called, undressed, sent awayKitty, and shut the door.  As the night before, D'Artagnandid not return home till five o'clock in the morning.At eleven o'clock Kitty came to him.  She held in her hand afresh billet from Milady.  This time the poor girl did noteven argue with D'Artagnan; she gave it to him at once. Shebelonged body and soul to her handsome soldier.

    D'Artagnan opened the letter and read as follows:

    This is the third time I have written to you to tell youthat I love you.  Beware that I do not write to you a fourthtime to tell you that I detest you.

    If you repent of the manner in which you have acted towardme, the young girl who brings you this will tell you how aman of spirit may obtain his pardon.

    D'Artagnan colored and grew pale several times in readingthis billet.

    "Oh, you love her still," said Kitty, who had not taken hereyes off the young man's countenance for an instant."No, Kitty, you are mistaken.  I do not love her, but I willavenge myself for her contempt."

    "Oh, yes, I know what sort of vengeance!  You told me that!""What matters it to you, Kitty?  You know it is you alonewhom I love."

    "How can I know that?"

    "By the scorn I will throw upon her."

    D'Artagnan took a pen and wrote:

    Madame, Until the present moment I could not believe that itwas to me your first two letters were addressed, so unworthydid I feel myself of such an honor; besides, I was soseriously indisposed that I could not in any case havereplied to them.

    But now I am forced to believe in the excess of yourkindness, since not only your letter but your servantassures me that I have the good fortune to be beloved byyou.

    She has no occasion to teach me the way in which a man ofspirit may obtain his pardon.  I will come and ask mine ateleven o'clock this evening.

    To delay it a single day would be in my eyes now to commit afresh offense.

    >From him whom you have rendered the happiest of men,Comte de Wardes

    This note was in the first place a forgery; it was likewisean indelicacy.  It was even, according to our presentmanners, something like an infamous action; but at thatperiod people did not manage affairs as they do today.Besides, D'Artagnan from her own admission knew Miladyculpable of treachery in matters more important, and couldentertain no respect for her.  And yet, notwithstanding thiswant of respect, he felt an uncontrollable passion for thiswoman boiling in his veins--passion drunk with contempt; butpassion or thirst, as the reader pleases.

    D'Artagnan's plan was very simple.  By Kitty's chamber hecould gain that of her mistress.  He would take advantage ofthe first moment of surprise, shame, and terror, to triumphover her.  He might fail, but something must be left tochance.  In eight days the campaign would open, and he wouldbe compelled to leave Paris; D'Artagnan had no time for aprolonged love siege.

    "There," said the young man, handing Kitty the lettersealed; "give that to Milady.  It is the count's reply."Poor Kitty became as pale as death; she suspected what theletter contained.

    "Listen, my dear girl," said D'Artagnan; "you cannot butperceive that all this must end, some way or other.  Miladymay discover that you gave the first billet to my lackeyinstead of to the count's; that it is I who have opened theothers which ought to have been opened by De Wardes.  Miladywill then turn you out of doors, and you know she is not thewoman to limit her vengeance.  "Alas!" said Kitty, "for whomhave I exposed myself to all that?"

    "For me, I well know, my sweet girl," said D'Artagnan.  "ButI am grateful, I swear to you."

    "But what does this note contain?"

    "Milady will tell you."

    "Ah, you do not love me!" cried Kitty, "and I am verywretched."

    To this reproach there is always one response which deludeswomen.  D'Artagnan replied in such a manner that Kittyremained in her great delusion.  Although she cried freelybefore deciding to transmit the letter to her mistress, shedid at last so decide, which was all D'Artagnan wished.Finally he promised that he would leave her mistress'spresence at an early hour that evening, and that when heleft the mistress he would ascend with the maid. Thispromise completed poor Kitty's consolation.

    34  IN WHICH THE EQUIPMENT OF ARAMIS AND PORTHOS IS TREATEDOF

    Since the four friends had been each in search of hisequipments, there had been no fixed meeting between them.They dined apart from one another, wherever they mighthappen to be, or rather where they could.  Duty likewise onits part took a portion of that precious time which wasgliding away so rapidly--only they had agreed to meet once aweek, about one o'clock, at the residence of Athos, seeingthat he, in agreement with the vow he had formed, did notpass over the threshold of his door.

    This day of reunion was the same day as that on which Kittycame to find D'Artagnan.  Soon as Kitty left him, D'Artagnandirected his steps toward the Rue Ferou.

    He found Athos and Aramis philosophizing.  Aramis had someslight inclination to resume the cassock.  Athos, accordingto his system, neither encouraged nor dissuaded him.  Athosbelieved that everyone should be left to his own free will.He never gave advice but when it was asked, and even then herequired to be asked twice.

    "People, in general," he said, "only ask advice not tofollow it; or if they do follow it, it is for the sake ofhaving someone to blame for having given it."

    Porthos arrived a minute after D'Artagnan.  The four friendswere reunited.

    The four countenances expressed four different feelings:that of Porthos, tranquillity; that of D'Artagnan, hope;that of Aramis, uneasiness; that of Athos, carelessness.At the end of a moment's conversation, in which Porthoshinted that a lady of elevated rank had condescended torelieve him from his embarrassment, Mousqueton entered.  Hecame to request his master to return to his lodgings, wherehis presence was urgent, as he piteously said.

    "Is it my equipment?"

    "Yes and no," replied Mousqueton.

    "Well, but can't you speak?"

    "Come, monsieur."

    Porthos rose, saluted his friends, and followed Mousqueton.An instant after, Bazin made his appearance at the door."What do you want with me, my friend?" said Aramis, withthat mildness of language which was observable in him everytime that his ideas were directed toward the Church."A man wishes to see Monsieur at home," replied Bazin."A man!  What man?"

    "A mendicant."

    "Give him alms, Bazin, and bid him pray for a poor sinner.""This mendicant insists upon speaking to you, and pretendsthat you will be very glad to see him."

    "Has he sent no particular message for me?"

    "Yes.  If Monsieur Aramis hesitates to come," he said, "tellhim I am from Tours."

    "From Tours!" cried Aramis.  "A thousand pardons, gentlemen;but no doubt this man brings me the news I expected." Andrising also, he went off at a quick pace.  There remainedAthos and D'Artagnan.

    "I believe these fellows have managed their business.  Whatdo you think, D'Artagnan?" said Athos.

    "I know that Porthos was in a fair way," replied D'Artagnan;"and as to Aramis to tell you the truth, I have never beenseriously uneasy on his account.  But you, my dear Athos--you, who so generously distributed the Englishman'spistoles, which were our legitimate property--what do youmean to do?"

    "I am satisfied with having killed that fellow, my boy,seeing that it is blessed bread to kill an Englishman; butif I had pocketed his pistoles, they would have weighed medown like a remorse.

    "Go to, my dear Athos; you have truly inconceivable ideas.""Let it pass. What do you think of Monsieur de Trevilletelling me, when he did me the honor to call upon meyesterday, that you associated with the suspected English,whom the cardinal protects?"

    "That is to say, I visit an Englishwoman--the one I named.""Oh, ay! the fair woman on whose account I gave you advice,which naturally you took care not to adopt."

    "I gave you my reasons."

    "Yes; you look there for your outfit, I think you said.""Not at all.  I have acquired certain knowledge that thatwoman was concerned in the abduction of Madame Bonacieux.""Yes, I understand now: to find one woman, you courtanother.  It is the longest road, but certainly the mostamusing."

    D'Artagnan was on the point of telling Athos all; but oneconsideration restrained him.  Athos was a gentleman,punctilious in points of honor; and there were in the planwhich our lover had devised for Milady, he was sure, certainthings that would not obtain the assent of this Puritan.  Hewas therefore silent; and as Athos was the least inquisitiveof any man on earth, D'Artagnan's confidence stopped there.We will therefore leave the two friends, who had nothingimportant to say to each other, and follow Aramis.Upon being informed that the person who wanted to speak tohim came from Tours, we have seen with what rapidity theyoung man followed, or rather went before, Bazin; he ranwithout stopping from the Rue Ferou to the Rue de Vaugirard.On entering he found a man of short stature and intelligenteyes, but covered with rags.

    "You have asked for me?" said the Musketeer.

    "I wish to speak with Monsieur Aramis.  Is that your name,monsieur?"

    "My very own.  You have brought me something?"

    "Yes, if you show me a certain embroidered handkerchief.""Here it is," said Aramis, taking a small key from hisbreast and opening a little ebony box inlaid with mother ofpearl, "here it is.  Look."

    "That is right," replied the mendicant; "dismiss your lackey."In fact, Bazin, curious to know what the mendicant couldwant with his master, kept pace with him as well as hecould, and arrived almost at the same time he did; but hisquickness was not of much use to him.  At the hint from themendicant his master made him a sign to retire, and he wasobliged to obey.

    Bazin gone, the mendicant cast a rapid glance around him inorder to be sure that nobody could either see or hear him,and opening his ragged vest, badly held together by aleather strap, he began to rip the upper part of hisdoublet, from which he drew a letter.

    Aramis uttered a cry of joy at the sight of the seal, kissedthe superscription with an almost religious respect, andopened the epistle, which contained what follows:

    "My Friend, it is the will of fate that we should be stillfor some time separated; but the delightful days of youthare not lost beyond return.  Perform your duty in camp; Iwill do mine elsewhere.  Accept that which the bearer bringsyou; make the campaign like a handsome true gentleman, andthink of me, who kisses tenderly your black eyes."Adieu; or rather, AU REVOIR."

    The mendicant continued to rip his garments; and drew fromamid his rags a hundred and fifty Spanish double pistoles,which he laid down on the table; then he opened the door,bowed, and went out before the young man, stupefied by hisletter, had ventured to address a word to him.

    Aramis then reperused the letter, and perceived apostscript:

    P.S. You may behave politely to the bearer, who is a countand a grandee of Spain!

    "Golden dreams!" cried Aramis.  "Oh, beautiful life! Yes, weare young; yes, we shall yet have happy days! My love, myblood, my life! all, all, all, are thine, my adoredmistress!"

    And he kissed the letter with passion, without evenvouchsafing a look at the gold which sparkled on the table.Bazin scratched at the door, and as Aramis had no longer anyreason to exclude him, he bade him come in.

    Bazin was stupefied at the sight of the gold, and forgotthat he came to announce D'Artagnan, who, curious to knowwho the mendicant could be, came to Aramis on leaving Athos.Now, as D'Artagnan used no ceremony with Aramis, seeing thatBazin forgot to announce him, he announced himself."The devil! my dear Aramis," said D'Artagnan, "if these arethe prunes that are sent to you from Tours, I beg you willmake my compliments to the gardener who gathers them.""You are mistaken, friend D'Artagnan," said Aramis, alwayson his guard; "this is from my publisher, who has just sentme the price of that poem in one-syllable verse which Ibegan yonder."

    "Ah, indeed," said D'Artagnan.  "Well, your publisher isvery generous, my dear Aramis, that's all I can say.""How, monsieur?" cried Bazin, "a poem sell so dear as that!It is incredible! Oh, monsieur, you can write as much as youlike; you may become equal to Monsieur de Voiture andMonsieur de Benserade.  I like that.  A poet is as good asan abbe.  Ah! Monsieur Aramis, become a poet, I beg of you.""Bazin, my friend," said Aramis, "I believe you meddle withmy conversation."

    Bazin perceived he was wrong; he bowed and went out."Ah!" said D'Artagnan with a smile, "you sell yourproductions at their weight in gold.  You are veryfortunate, my friend; but take care or you will lose thatletter which is peeping from your doublet, and which alsocomes, no doubt, from your publisher."

    Aramis blushed to the eyes, crammed in the letter, andre-buttoned his doublet.

    "My dear D'Artagnan," said he, "if you please, we will joinour friends; as I am rich, we will today begin to dinetogether again, expecting that you will be rich in yourturn."

    "My faith!" said D'Artagnan, with great pleasure.  "It islong since we have had a good dinner; and I, for my part,have a somewhat hazardous expedition for this evening, andshall not be sorry, I confess, to fortify myself with a fewglasses of good old Burgundy."

    "Agreed, as to the old Burgundy; I have no objection tothat," said Aramis, from whom the letter and the gold hadremoved, as by magic, his ideas of conversion.

    And having put three or four double pistoles into his pocketto answer the needs of the moment, he placed the others inthe ebony box, inlaid with mother of pearl, in which was thefamous handkerchief which served him as a talisman.The two friends repaired to Athos's, and he, faithful to hisvow of not going out, took upon him to order dinner to bebrought to them.  As he was perfectly acquainted with thedetails of gastronomy, D'Artagnan and Aramis made noobjection to abandoning this important care to him.They went to find Porthos, and at the corner of the Rue Bacmet Mousqueton, who, with a most pitiable air, was drivingbefore him a mule and a horse.

    D'Artagnan uttered a cry of surprise, which was not quitefree from joy.

    "Ah, my yellow horse," cried he.  "Aramis, look at thathorse!"

    "Oh, the frightful brute!" said Aramis.

    "Ah, my dear," replied D'Artagnan, "upon that very horse Icame to Paris."

    "What, does Monsieur know this horse?" said Mousqueton."It is of an original color," said Aramis; "I never saw onewith such a hide in my life."

    "I can well believe it," replied D'Artagnan, "and that waswhy I got three crowns for him.  It must have been for hishide, for, CERTESf, the carcass is not worth eighteen livres.But bow did this horse come into your bands, Mousqueton?""Pray," said the lackey, "say nothing about it, monsieur; itis a frightful trick of the husband of our duchess!""How is that, Mousqueton?"

    "Why, we are looked upon with a rather favorable eye by alady of quality, the Duchesse de--but, your pardon; my masterhas commanded me to be discreet.  She had forced us toaccept a little souvenir, a magnificent Spanish GENET and anAndalusian mule, which were beautiful to look upon.  Thehusband heard of the affair; on their way he confiscated thetwo magnificent beasts which were being sent to us, andsubstituted these horrible animals."

    "Which you are taking back to him?" said D'Artagnan."Exactly!" replied Mousqueton. "You may well believe that wewill not accept such steeds as these in exchange for thosewhich had been promised to us."

    "No, PARDIEU; though I should like to have seen Porthos onmy yellow horse.  That would give me an idea of how I lookedwhen I arrived in Paris.  But don't let us hinder you,Mousqueton; go and perform your master's orders.  Is he athome?"

    "Yes, monsieur," said Mousqueton, "but in a very ill humor.Get up!"

    He continued his way toward the Quai des Grands Augustins,while the two friends went to ring at the bell of theunfortunate Porthos.  He, having seen them crossing theyard, took care not to answer, and they rang in vain.Meanwhile Mousqueton continued on his way, and crossing thePont Neuf, still driving the two sorry animals before him,he reached the Rue aux Ours.  Arrived there, he fastened,according to the orders of his master, both horse and muleto the knocker of the procurator's door; then, withouttaking any thought for their future, he returned to Porthos,and told him that his commission was completed.

    In a short time the two unfortunate beasts, who had noteaten anything since the morning, made such a noise inraising and letting fall the knocker that the procuratorordered his errand boy to go and inquire in the neighborhoodto whom this horse and mule belonged.

    Mme. Coquenard recognized her present, and could not atfirst comprehend this restitution; but the visit of Porthossoon enlightened her.  The anger which fired the eyes of theMusketeer, in spite of his efforts to suppress it, terrifiedhis sensitive inamorata.  In fact, Mousqueton had notconcealed from his master that he had met D'Artagnan andAramis, and that D'Artagnan in the yellow horse hadrecognized the Bearnese pony upon which he had come toParis, and which he had sold for three crowns.

    Porthos went away after having appointed a meeting with theprocurator's wife in the cloister of St. Magloire.  Theprocurator, seeing he was going, invited him to dinner--aninvitation which the Musketeer refused with a majestic air.Mme. Coquenard repaired trembling to the cloister of St.Magloire, for she guessed the reproaches that awaited herthere; but she was fascinated by the lofty airs of Porthos.All that which a man wounded in his self-love could let fallin the shape of imprecations and reproaches upon the head ofa woman Porthos let fall upon the bowed head of theprocurator's wife.

    "Alas," said she, "I did all for the best! One of ourclients is a horsedealer; he owes money to the office, andis backward in his pay.  I took the mule and the horse forwhat he owed us; he assured me that they were two noblesteeds."

    "Well, madame," said Porthos, "if he owed you more than fivecrowns, your horsedealer is a thief."

    "There is no harm in trying to buy things cheap, MonsieurPorthos," said the procurator's wife, seeking to excuseherself.

    "No, madame; but they who so assiduously try to buy thingscheap ought to permit others to seek more generous friends."And Porthos, turning on his heel, made a step to retire."Monsieur Porthos!  Monsieur Porthos!" cried the

    procurator's wife.  "I have been wrong; I see it.  I oughtnot to have driven a bargain when it was to equip a cavalierlike you."

    Porthos, without reply, retreated a second step.  Theprocurator's wife fancied she saw him in a brilliant cloud,all surrounded by duchesses and marchionesses, who cast bagsof money at his feet.

    "Stop, in the name of heaven, Monsieur Porthos!" cried she."Stop, and let us talk."

    "Talking with you brings me misfortune," said Porthos."But, tell me, what do you ask?"

    "Nothing; for that amounts to the same thing as if I askedyou for something."

    The procurator's wife hung upon the arm of Porthos, and inthe violence of her grief she cried out, "Monsieur Porthos,I am ignorant of all such matters!  How should I know what ahorse is?  How should I know what horse furniture is?""You should have left it to me, then, madame, who know whatthey are; but you wished to be frugal, and consequently tolend at usury."

    "It was wrong, Monsieur Porthos; but I will repair thatwrong, upon my word of honor."

    "How so?" asked the Musketeer.

    "Listen.  This evening M. Coquenard is going to the house ofthe Due de Chaulnes, who has sent for him.  It is for aconsultation, which will last three hours at least.  Come!We shall be alone, and can make up our accounts.""In good time.  Now you talk, my dear."

    "You pardon me?"

    "We shall see," said Porthos, majestically; and the twoseparated saying, "Till this evening."

    "The devil!" thought Porthos, as he walked away, "it appearsI am getting nearer to Monsieur Coquenard's strongbox atlast."

    35  A GASCON A MATCH FOR CUPID

    The evening so impatiently waited for by Porthos and byD'Artagnan at last arrived.

    As was his custom, D'Artagnan presented himself at Milady'sat about nine o'clock.  He found her in a charming humor.Never had he been so well received.  Our Gascon knew, by thefirst glance of his eye, that his billet had been delivered,and that this billet had had its effect.

    Kitty entered to bring some sherbet.  Her mistress put on acharming face, and smiled on her graciously; but alas! thepoor girl was so sad that she did not even notice Milady'scondescension.

    D'Artagnan looked at the two women, one after the other, andwas forced to acknowledge that in his opinion Dame Naturehad made a mistake in their formation.  To the great ladyshe had given a heart vile and venal; to the SOUBRETTE shehad given the heart of a duchess.

    At ten o'clock Milady began to appear restless.  D'Artagnanknew what she wanted.  She looked at the clock, rose,reseated herself, smiled at D'Artagnan with an air whichsaid, "You are very amiable, no doubt, but you would becharming if you would only depart."

    D'Artagnan rose and took his hat; Milady gave him her handto kiss.  The young man felt her press his hand, andcomprehended that this was a sentiment, not of coquetry, butof gratitude because of his departure.

    "She loves him devilishly," he murmured.  Then he went out.This time Kitty was nowhere waiting for him; neither in theantechamber, nor in the corridor, nor beneath the greatdoor.  It was necessary that D'Artagnan should find alonethe staircase and the little chamber.  She heard him enter,but she did not raise her head.  The young man went to herand took her hands; then she sobbed aloud.

    As D'Artagnan had presumed, on receiving his letter, Miladyin a delirium of joy had told her servant everything; and byway of recompense for the manner in which she had this timeexecuted the commission, she had given Kitty a purse.Returning to her own room, Kitty had thrown the purse into acorner, where it lay open, disgorging three or four goldpieces on the carpet.  The poor girl, under the caresses ofD'Artagnan, lifted her head.  D'Artagnan himself wasfrightened by the change in her countenance.  She joined herhands with a suppliant air, but without venturing to speak aword.  As little sensitive as was the heart of D'Artagnan,he was touched by this mute sorrow; but he held tootenaciously to his projects, above all to this one, tochange the program which he had laid out in advance.  He didnot therefore allow her any hope that he would flinch; onlyhe represented his action as one of simple vengeance.For the rest this vengeance was very easy; for Milady,doubtless to conceal her blushes from her lover, had orderedKitty to extinguish all the lights in the apartment, andeven in the little chamber itself.  Before daybreak M. deWardes must take his departure, still in obscurity.Presently they heard Milady retire to her room.  D'Artagnanslipped into the wardrobe.  Hardly was he concealed when thelittle bell sounded.  Kitty went to her mistress, and didnot leave the door open; but the partition was so thin thatone could hear nearly all that passed between the two women.Milady seemed overcome with joy, and made Kitty repeat thesmallest details of the pretended interview of the soubrettewith De Wardes when he received the letter; how he hadresponded; what was the expression of his face; if he seemedvery amorous.  And to all these questions poor Kitty, forcedto put on a pleasant face, responded in a stifled voicewhose dolorous accent her mistress did not however remark,solely because happiness is egotistical.

    Finally, as the hour for her interview with the countapproached, Milady had everything about her darkened, andordered Kitty to return to her own chamber, and introduce DeWardes whenever he presented himself.

    Kitty's detention was not long.  Hardly had D'Artagnan seen,through a crevice in his closet, that the whole apartmentwas in obscurity, than he slipped out of his concealment, atthe very moment when Kitty reclosed the door of

    communication.

    "What is that noise?" demanded Milady.

    "It is I," said D'Artagnan in a subdued voice, "I, the Comtede Wardes."

    "Oh, my God, my God!" murmured Kitty, "he has not evenwaited for the hour he himself named!"

    "Well," said Milady, in a trembling voice, "why do you notenter?  Count, Count," added she, "you know that I wait foryou."

    At this appeal D'Artagnan drew Kitty quietly away, andslipped into the chamber.

    If rage or sorrow ever torture the heart, it is when a loverreceives under a name which is not his own protestations oflove addressed to his happy rival.  D'Artagnan was in adolorous situation which he had not foreseen. Jealousygnawed his heart; and he suffered almost as much as poorKitty, who at that very moment was crying in the nextchamber.

    "Yes, Count," said Milady, in her softest voice, andpressing his hand in her own, "I am happy in the love whichyour looks and your words have expressed to me every time wehave met.  I also--I love you.  Oh, tomorrow, tomorrow, Imust have some pledge from you which will prove that youthink of me; and that you may not forget me, take this!" andshe slipped a ring from her finger onto D'Artagnan's.D'Artagnan remembered having seen this ring on the finger ofMilady; it was a magnificent sapphire, encircled withbrilliants.

    The first movement of D'Artagnan was to return it, butMilady added, "No, no! Keep that ring for love of me.Besides, in accepting it," she added, in a voice full ofemotion, "you render me a much greater service than youimagine."

    "This woman is full of mysteries," murmured D'Artagnan tohimself.  At that instant he felt himself ready to revealall.  He even opened his mouth to tell Milady who he was,and with what a revengeful purpose he had come; but sheadded, "Poor angel, whom that monster of a Gascon barelyfailed to kill."

    The monster was himself.

    "Oh," continued Milady, "do your wounds still make yousuffer?"

    "Yes, much," said D'Artagnan, who did not well know how toanswer.

    "Be tranquil," murmured Milady; "I will avenge you--andcruelly!"

    "PESTE!" said D'Artagnan to himself, "the moment forconfidences has not yet come."

    It took some time for D'Artagnan to resume this littledialogue; but then all the ideas of vengeance which he hadbrought with him had completely vanished.  This womanexercised over him an unaccountable power; he hated andadored her at the same time.  He would not have believedthat two sentiments so opposite could dwell in the sameheart, and by their union constitute a passion so strange,and as it were, diabolical.

    Presently it sounded one o'clock.  It was necessary toseparate.  D'Artagnan at the moment of quitting Milady feltonly the liveliest regret at the parting; and as theyaddressed each other in a reciprocally passionate adieu,another interview was arranged for the following week.Poor Kitty hoped to speak a few words to D'Artagnan when hepassed through her chamber; but Milady herself reconductedhim through the darkness, and only quit him at thestaircase.

    The next morning D'Artagnan ran to find Athos.  He wasengaged in an adventure so singular that he wished forcounsel.  He therefore told him all.

    "Your Milady," said he, "appears to be an infamous creature,but not the less you have done wrong to deceive her.  In onefashion or another you have a terrible enemy on your hands."While thus speaking Athos regarded with attention thesapphire set with diamonds which had taken, on D'Artagnan'sfinger, the place of the queen's ring, carefully kept in acasket.

    "You notice my ring?" said the Gascon, proud to display sorich a gift in the eyes of his friends.

    "Yes," said Athos, "it reminds me of a family jewel.""It is beautiful, is it not?" said D'Artagnan.

    "Yes," said Athos, "magnificent.  I did not think twosapphires of such a fine water existed.  Have you traded itfor your diamond?"

    "No.  It is a gift from my beautiful Englishwoman, or ratherFrenchwoman--for I am convinced she was born in France,though I have not questioned her."

    "That ring comes from Milady?" cried Athos, with a voice inwhich it was easy to detect strong emotion.

    "Her very self; she gave it me last night.  Here it is,"replied D'Artagnan, taking it from his finger.

    Athos examined it and became very pale.  He tried it on hisleft hand; it fit his finger as if made for it.

    A shade of anger and vengeance passed across the usuallycalm brow of this gentleman.

    "It is impossible it can be she," said be.  "How could thisring come into the hands of Milady Clarik?  And yet it isdifficult to suppose such a resemblance should exist betweentwo jewels."

    "Do you know this ring?" said D'Artagnan.

    "I thought I did," replied Athos; "but no doubt I wasmistaken."  And he returned D'Artagnan the ring without,however, ceasing to look at it.

    "Pray, D'Artagnan," said Athos, after a minute, "either takeoff that ring or turn the mounting inside; it recalls suchcruel recollections that I shall have no head to conversewith you.  Don't ask me for counsel; don't tell me you areperplexed what to do.  But stop! let me look at thatsapphire again; the one I mentioned to you had one of itsfaces scratched by accident."

    D'Artagnan took off the ring, giving it again to Athos.Athos started.  "Look," said he, "is it not strange?" and hepointed out to D'Artagnan the scratch he had remembered."But from whom did this ring come to you, Athos?""From my mother, who inherited it from her mother.  As Itold you, it is an old family jewel."

    "And you--sold it?" asked D'Artagnan, hesitatingly."No," replied Athos, with a singular smile.  "I gave it awayin a night of love, as it has been given to you."D'Artagnan became pensive in his turn; it appeared as ifthere were abysses in Milady's soul whose depths were darkand unknown.  He took back the ring, but put it in hispocket and not on his finger.

    "D'Artagnan," said Athos, taking his hand, "you know I loveyou; if I had a son I could not love him better.  Take myadvice, renounce this woman.  I do not know her, but a sortof intuition tells me she is a lost creature, and that thereis something fatal about her."

    "You are right," said D'Artagnan; "I will have done withher.  I own that this woman terrifies me."

    "Shall you have the courage?" said Athos.

    "I shall," replied D'Artagnan, "and instantly."

    "In truth, my young friend, you will act rightly," said thegentleman, pressing the Gascon's hand with an affectionalmost paternal; "and God grant that this woman, who hasscarcely entered into your life, may not leave a terribletrace in it!" And Athos bowed to D'Artagnan like a man whowishes it understood that he would not be sorry to be leftalone with his thoughts.

    On reaching home D'Artagnan found Kitty waiting for him.  Amonth of fever could not have changed her more than this onenight of sleeplessness and sorrow.

    She was sent by her mistress to the false De Wardes.  Hermistress was mad with love, intoxicated with joy.  Shewished to know when her lover would meet her a second night;and poor Kitty, pale and trembling, awaited D'Artagnan'sreply.  The counsels of his friend, joined to the cries ofhis own heart, made him determine, now his pride was savedand his vengeance satisfied, not to see Milady again.  As areply, he wrote the following letter:

    Do not depend upon me, madame, for the next meeting.  Sincemy convalescence I have so many affairs of this kind on myhands that I am forced to regulate them a little.  When yourturn comes, I shall have the honor to inform you of it.  Ikiss your hands.

    Comte de Wardes

    Not a word about the sapphire.  Was the Gascon determined tokeep it as a weapon against Milady, or else, let us befrank, did he not reserve the sapphire as a last resourcefor his outfit?  It would be wrong to judge the actions ofone period from the point of view of another.  That whichwould now be considered as disgraceful to a gentleman was atthat time quite a simple and natural affair, and the youngersons of the best families were frequently supported by theirmistresses.  D'Artagnan gave the open letter to Kitty, whoat first was unable to comprehend it, but who became almostwild with joy on reading it a second time.  She couldscarcely believe in her happiness; and D'Artagnan was forcedto renew with the living voice the assurances which he hadwritten.  And whatever might be--considering the violentcharacter of Milady--the danger which the poor girl incurredin giving this billet to her mistress, she ran back to thePlace Royale as fast as her legs could carry her.The heart of the best woman is pitiless toward the sorrowsof a rival.

    Milady opened the letter with eagerness equal to Kitty's inbringing it; but at the first words she read she becamelivid.  She crushed the paper in her band, and turning withflashing eyes upon Kitty, she cried, "What is this letter?""The answer to Madame's," replied Kitty, all in a tremble."Impossible!" cried Milady.  "It is impossible a gentlemancould have written such a letter to a woman." Then all atonce, starting, she cried, "My God! can he have--" and shestopped. She ground her teeth; she was of the color ofashes.  She tried to go toward the window for air, but shecould only stretch forth her arms; her legs failed her, andshe sank into an armchair.  Kitty, fearing she was ill,hastened toward her and was beginning to open her dress; butMilady started up, pushing her away.  "What do you want withme?" said she, "and why do you place your hand on me?""I thought that Madame was ill, and I wished to bring herhelp," responded the maid, frightened at the terribleexpression which had come over her mistress's face."I faint?  I? I? Do you take me for half a woman?  When I aminsulted I do not faint; I avenge myself!"

    And she made a sign for Kitty to leave the room.

    36  DREAM OF VENGEANCE

    That evening Milady gave orders that when M. D'Artagnan cameas usual, he should be immediately admitted; but he did notcome.

    The next day Kitty went to see the young man again, andrelated to him all that had passed on the preceding evening.D'Artagnan smiled; this jealous anger of Milady was hisrevenge.

    That evening Milady was still more impatient than on thepreceding evening.  She renewed the order relative to theGascon; but as before she expected him in vain.

    The next morning, when Kitty presented herself atD'Artagnan's, she was no longer joyous and alert as on thetwo preceding days; but on the contrary sad as death.D'Artagnan asked the poor girl what was the matter with her;but she, as her only reply, drew a letter from her pocketand gave it to him.

    This letter was in Milady's handwriting; only this time itwas addressed to M. D'Artagnan, and not to M. de Wardes.He opened it and read as follows:

    Dear M. d'Artagnan, It is wrong thus to neglect yourfriends, particularly at the moment you are about to leavethem for so long a time.  My brother-in-law and myselfexpected you yesterday and the day before, but in vain.Will it be the same this evening?

    Your very grateful,

    Milady Clarik

    "That's all very simple," said D'Artagnan; "I expected thisletter. My credit rises by the fall of that of the Comte deWardes."

    "And will you go?" asked Kitty.

    "Listen to me, my dear girl," said the Gascon, who soughtfor an excuse in his own eyes for breaking the promise hehad made Athos; "you must understand it would be impoliticnot to accept such a positive invitation.  Milady, notseeing me come again, would not be able to understand whatcould cause the interruption of my visits, and might suspectsomething; who could say how far the vengeance of such awoman would go?"

    "Oh, my God!" said Kitty, "you know how to represent thingsin such a way that you are always in the right.  You aregoing now to pay your court to her again, and if this timeyou succeed in pleasing her in your own name and with yourown face, it will be much worse than before."

    Instinct made poor Kitty guess a part of what was to happen.D'Artagnan reassured her as well as he could, and promisedto remain insensible to the seductions of Milady.He desired Kitty to tell her mistress that he could not bemore grateful for her kindnesses than he was, and that hewould be obedient to her orders.  He did not dare to writefor fear of not being able--to such experienced eyes as thoseof Milady--to disguise his writing sufficiently.

    As nine o'clock sounded, D'Artagnan was at the Place Royale.It was evident that the servants who waited in theantechamber were warned, for as soon as D'Artagnan appeared,before even he had asked if Milady were visible, one of themran to announce him.

    "Show him in," said Milady, in a quick tone, but so piercingthat D'Artagnan heard her in the antechamber.

    He was introduced.

    "I am at home to nobody," said Milady; "observe, to nobody."The servant went out.

    D'Artagnan cast an inquiring glance at Milady.  She waspale, and looked fatigued, either from tears or want ofsleep.  The number of lights had been intentionallydiminished, but the young woman could not conceal the tracesof the fever which had devoured her for two days.D'Artagnan approached her with his usual gallantry.  Shethen made an extraordinary effort to receive him, but neverdid a more distressed countenance give the lie to a moreamiable smile.

    To the questions which D'Artagnan put concerning her health,she replied, "Bad, very bad."

    "Then," replied he, "my visit is ill-timed; you, no doubt,stand in need of repose, and I will withdraw."

    "No. no!" said Milady.  "On the contrary, stay, MonsieurD'Artagnan; your agreeable company will divert me.""Oh, oh!" thought D'Artagnan.  "She has never been so kindbefore.  On guard!"

    Milady assumed the most agreeable air possible, andconversed with more than her usual brilliancy.  At the sametime the fever, which for an instant abandoned her, returnedto give luster to her eyes, color to her cheeks, andvermillion to her lips.  D'Artagnan was again in thepresence of the Circe who had before surrounded him with herenchantments.  His love, which he believed to be extinct butwhich was only asleep, awoke again in his heart.  Miladysmiled, and D'Artagnan felt that he could damn himself forthat smile.  There was a moment at which he felt somethinglike remorse.

    By degrees, Milady became more communicative.  She askedD'Artagnan if he had a mistress.

    "Alas!" said D'Artagnan, with the most sentimental air hecould assume, "can you be cruel enough to put such aquestion to me--to me, who, from the moment I saw you, haveonly breathed and sighed through you and for you?"Milady smiled with a strange smile.

    "Then you love me?" said she.

    "Have I any need to tell you so?  Have you not perceivedit?"

    "It may be; but you know the more hearts are worth thecapture, the more difficult they are to be won."

    "Oh, difficulties do not affright me," said D'Artagnan.  "Ishrink before nothing but impossibilities."

    "Nothing is impossible," replied Milady, "to true love.""Nothing, madame?"

    "Nothing," replied Milady.

    "The devil!" thought D'Artagnan.  "The note is changed.  Isshe going to fall in love with me, by chance, this fairinconstant; and will she be disposed to give me myselfanother sapphire like that which she gave me for De Wardes?"D'Artagnan rapidly drew his seat nearer to Milady's."Well, now," she said, "let us see what you would do toprove this love of which you speak."

    "All that could be required of me.  Order; I am ready.""For everything?"

    "For everything," cried D'Artagnan, who knew beforehand thathe had not much to risk in engaging himself thus."Well, now let us talk a little seriously," said Milady, inher turn drawing her armchair nearer to D'Artagnan's chair."I am all attention, madame," said he.

    Milady remained thoughtful and undecided for a moment; then,as if appearing to have formed a resolution, she said, "Ihave an enemy."

    "You,  madame!" said D'Artagnan, affecting surprise; "isthat possible, my God?--good and beautiful as you are!""A mortal enemy."

    "Indeed!"

    "An enemy who has insulted me so cruelly that between himand me it is war to the death.  May I reckon on you as anauxiliary?"

    D'Artagnan at once perceived the ground which the vindictivecreature wished to reach.

    "You may, madame," said he, with emphasis.  "My arm and mylife belong to you, like my love."

    "Then," said Milady, "since you are as generous as you areloving--"

    She stopped.

    "Well?" demanded D'Artagnan.

    "Well," replied Milady, after a moment of silence, "from thepresent time, cease to talk of impossibilities."

    "Do not overwhelm me with happiness," cried D'Artagnan,throwing himself on his knees, and covering with kisses thehands abandoned to him.

    "Avenge me of that infamous De Wardes," said Milady, betweenher teeth, "and I shall soon know how to get rid of you--youdouble idiot, you animated sword blade!"

    "Fall voluntarily into my arms, hypocritical and dangerouswoman," said D'Artagnan, likewise to himself, "after havingabused me with such effrontery, and afterward I will laughat you with him whom you wish me to kill."

    D'Artagnan lifted up his head.

    "I am ready," said he.

    "You have understood me, then, dear Monsieur D'Artagnan"said Milady.

    "I could interpret one of your looks."

    "Then you would employ for me your arm which has alreadyacquired so much renown?"

    "Instantly!"

    "But on my part," said Milady, "how should I repay such aservice?  I know these lovers.  They are men who do nothingfor nothing."

    "You know the only reply that I desire," said D'Artagnan,"the only one worthy of you and of me!"

    And he drew nearer to her.

    She scarcely resisted.

    "Interested man!" cried she, smiling.

    "Ah," cried D'Artagnan, really carried away by the passionthis woman had the power to kindle in his heart, "ah, thatis because my happiness appears so impossible to me; and Ihave such fear that it should fly away from me like a dreamthat I pant to make a reality of it."

    "Well, merit this pretended happiness, then!"

    "I am at your orders," said D'Artagnan.

    "Quite certain?" said Milady, with a last doubt.

    "Only name to me the base man that has brought tears intoyour beautiful eyes!"

    "Who told you that I had been weeping?" said she."It appeared to me--"

    "Such women as I never weep," said Milady.

    "So much the better! Come, tell me his name!"

    "Remember that his name is all my secret."

    "Yet I must know his name."

    "Yes, you must; see what confidence I have in you!""You overwhelm me with joy.  What is his name?"

    "You know him."

    "Indeed."

    "Yes.

    "It is surely not one of my friends?" replied D'Artagnan,affecting hesitation in order to make her believe himignorant.

    "If it were one of your friends you would hesitate, then?"cried Milady; and a threatening glance darted from her eyes."Not if it were my own brother!" cried D'Artagnan, as ifcarried away by his enthusiasm.

    Our Gascon promised this without risk, for he knew all thatwas meant.

    "I love your devotedness," said Milady.

    "Alas, do you love nothing else in me?" asked D'Artagnan."I love you also, YOU!" said she, taking his hand.The warm pressure made D'Artagnan tremble, as if by thetouch that fever which consumed Milady attacked himself."You love me, you!" cried he.  "Oh, if that were so, I should lose my reason!"And he folded her in his arms, She made no effort to removeher lips from his kisses; only she did not respond to them.Her lips were cold; it appeared to D'Artagnan that he hadembraced a statue.

    He was not the less intoxicated with joy, electrified bylove.  He almost believed in the tenderness of Milady; healmost believed in the crime of De Wardes.  If De Wardes hadat that moment been under his hand, he would have killedhim.

    Milady seized the occasion,

    "His name is--" said she, in her turn.

    "De Wardes; I know it," cried D'Artagnan.

    "And how do you know it?" asked Milady, seizing both hishands, and endeavoring to read with her eyes to the bottomof his heart.

    D'Artagnan felt he had allowed himself to be carried away,and that he had committed an error.

    "Tell me, tell me, tell me, I say," repeated Milady, "how doyou know it?"

    "How do I know it?" said D'Artagnan.

    "Yes."

    "I know it because yesterday Monsieur de Wardes, in a saloonwhere I was, showed a ring which he said he had receivedfrom you."

    "Wretch!" cried Milady.

    The epithet, as may be easily understood, resounded to thevery bottom of D'Artagnan's heart.

    "Well?" continued she.

    "Well, I will avenge you of this wretch," repliedD'Artagnan, giving himself the airs of Don Japhet ofArmenia.

    "Thanks, my brave friend!" cried Milady; "and when shall Ibe avenged?"

    "Tomorrow--immediately--when you please!"

    Milady was about to cry out, "Immediately," but shereflected that such precipitation would not be very gracioustoward D'Artagnan.

    Besides, she had a thousand precautions to take, a thousandcounsels to give to her defender, in order that he mightavoid explanations with the count before witnesses.  Allthis was answered by an expression of D'Artagnan's."Tomorrow," said he, "you will be avenged, or I shall bedead."

    "No," said she, "you will avenge me; but you will not bedead.  He is a coward."

    "With women, perhaps; but not with men.  I know something ofhim."

    "But it seems you had not much reason to complain of yourfortune in your contest with him."

    "Fortune is a courtesan; favorable yesterday, she may turnher back tomorrow."

    "Which means that you now hesitate?"

    "No, I do not hesitate; God forbid!  But would it be just toallow me to go to a possible death without having given meat least something more than hope?"

    Milady answered by a glance which said, "Is that all?--speak,then." And then accompanying the glance with explanatorywords, "That is but too just," said she, tenderly."Oh, you are an angel!" exclaimed the young man.

    "Then all is agreed?" said she.

    "Except that which I ask of you, dear love."

    "But when I assure you that you may rely on my tenderness?""I cannot wait till tomorrow."

    "Silence!  I hear my brother.  It will be useless for him tofind you here."

    She rang the bell and Kitty appeared.

    "Go out this way," said she, opening a small private door,"and come back at eleven o'clock; we will then terminatethis conversation.  Kitty will conduct you to my chamber."The poor girl almost fainted at hearing these words."Well, mademoiselle, what are you thinking about, standingthere like a statue?  Do as I bid you: show the chevalierout; and this evening at eleven o'clock--you have heard whatI said."

    "It appears that these appointments are all made for eleveno'clock," thought D'Artagnan; "that's a settled custom."Milady held out her hand to him, which he kissed tenderly.367

    "But," said he, as he retired as quickly as possible fromthe reproaches of Kitty, "I must not play the fool.  Thiswoman is certainly a great liar.  I must take care."

    37  MILADY'S SECRET

    D'Artagnan left the hotel instead of going up at once toKitty's chamber, as she endeavored to persuade him to do--andthat for two reasons: the first, because by this means heshould escape reproaches, recriminations, and prayers; thesecond, because be was not sorry to have an opportunity ofreading his own thoughts and endeavoring, if possible, tofathom those of this woman.

    What was most clear in the matter was that D'Artagnan lovedMilady like a madman, and that she did not love him at all.In an instant D'Artagnan perceived that the best way inwhich he could act would be to go home and write Milady along letter, in which he would confess to her that he and DeWardes were, up to the present moment absolutely the same,and that consequently he could not undertake, withoutcommitting suicide, to kill the Comte de Wardes.  But bealso was spurred on by a ferocious desire of vengeance.  Hewished to subdue this woman in his own name; and as thisvengeance appeared to him to have a certain sweetness in it,he could not make up his mind to renounce it.

    He walked six or seven times round the Place Royale, turningat every ten steps to look at the light in Milady'sapartment, which was to be seen through the blinds.  It wasevident that this time the young woman was not in such hasteto retire to her apartment as she had been the first.At length the light disappeared.  With this light wasextinguished the last irresolution in the heart ofD'Artagnan.  He recalled to his mind the details of thefirst night, and with a beating heart and a brain on fire here-entered the hotel and flew toward Kitty's chamber.The poor girl, pale as death and trembling in all her limbs,wished to delay her lover; but Milady, with her ear on thewatch, had heard the noise D'Artagnan had made, and openingthe door, said, "Come in."

    All this was of such incredible immodesty, of such monstrouseffrontery, that D'Artagnan could scarcely believe what hesaw or what he heard.  He imagined himself to be drawn intoone of those fantastic intrigues one meets in dreams.  He,however, darted not the less quickly toward Milady, yieldingto that magnetic attraction which the loadstone exercisesover iron.

    As the door closed after them Kitty rushed toward it.Jealousy, fury, offended pride, all the passions in shortthat dispute the heart of an outraged woman in love, urgedher to make a revelation; but she reflected that she wouldbe totally lost if she confessed having assisted in such amachination, and above all, that D'Artagnan would also belost to her forever.  This last thought of love counseledher to make this last sacrifice.

    D'Artagnan, on his part, had gained the summit of all hiswishes.  It was no longer a rival who was beloved; it washimself who was apparently beloved.  A secret voicewhispered to him, at the bottom of his heart, that he wasbut an instrument of vengeance, that he was only caressedtill he had given death; but pride, but self-love, butmadness silenced this voice and stifled its murmurs.  Andthen our Gascon, with that large quantity of conceit whichwe know he possessed, compared himself with De Wardes, andasked himself why, after all, he should not be beloved forhimself?

    He was absorbed entirely by the sensations of the moment.Milady was no longer for him that woman of fatal intentionswho had for a moment terrified him; she was an ardent,passionate mistress, abandoning herself to love which shealso seemed to feel.  Two hours thus glided away.  When thetransports of the two lovers were calmer, Milady, who hadnot the same motives for forgetfulness that D'Artagnan had,was the first to return to reality, and asked the young manif the means which were on the morrow to bring on theencounter between him and De Wardes were already arranged inhis mind.

    But D'Artagnan, whose ideas had taken quite another course,forgot himself like a fool, and answered gallantly that itwas too late to think about duels and sword thrusts.This coldness toward the only interests that occupied hermind terrified Milady, whose questions became more pressing.Then D'Artagnan, who had never seriously thought of thisimpossible duel, endeavored to turn the conversation; but hecould not succeed.  Milady kept him within the limits shehad traced beforehand with her irresistible spirit and heriron will.

    D'Artagnan fancied himself very cunning when advising Miladyto renounce, by pardoning De Wardes, the furious projectsshe had formed.

    But at the first word the young woman started, and exclaimedin a sharp, bantering tone. which sounded strangely in thedarkness, "Are you afraid, dear Monsieur D'Artagnan?""You cannot think so, dear love!" replied D'Artagnan; "butnow, suppose this poor Comte de Wardes were less guilty thanyou think him?"

    "At all events," said Milady, seriously, "he has deceivedme, and from the moment he deceived me, he merited death.""He shall die, then, since you condemn him!" saidD'Artagnan, in so firm a tone that it appeared to Milady anundoubted proof of devotion.  This reassured her.We cannot say how long the night seemed to Milady, butD'Artagnan believed it to be hardly two hours before thedaylight peeped through the window blinds, and invaded thechamber with its paleness.  Seeing D'Artagnan about to leaveher, Milady recalled his promise to avenge her on the Comtede Wardes.

    "I am quite ready," said D'Artagnan; "but in the first placeI should like to be certain of one thing."

    "And what is that?" asked Milady.

    "That is, whether you really love me?"

    "I have given you proof of that, it seems to me.""And I am yours, body and soul!"

    "Thanks, my brave lover; but as you are satisfied of mylove, you must, in your turn, satisfy me of yours.  Is itnot so?"

    "Certainly; but if you love me as much as you say," repliedD'Artagnan, "do you not entertain a little fear on myaccount?"

    "What have I to fear?"

    "Why, that I may be dangerously wounded--killed even.""Impossible!" cried Milady, "you are such a valiant man, andsuch an expert swordsman."

    "You would not, then, prefer a method," resumed D'Artagnan,"which would equally avenge you while rendering the combatuseless?"

    Milady looked at her lover in silence.  The pale light ofthe first rays of day gave to her clear eyes a strangelyfrightful expression.

    "Really," said she, "I believe you now begin to hesitate.""No, I do not hesitate; but I really pity this poor Comte deWardes, since you have ceased to love him.  I think that aman must be so severely punished by the loss of your lovethat he stands in need of no other chastisement.""Who told you that I loved him?" asked Milady, sharply."At least, I am now at liberty to believe, without too muchfatuity, that you love another," said the young man, in acaressing tone, "and I repeat that I am really interestedfor the count."

    "You?" asked Milady.

    "Yes, I."

    "And why YOU?"

    "Because I alone know--"

    "What?"

    "That he is far from being, or rather having been, so guiltytoward you as he appears."

    "Indeed!" said Milady, in an anxious tone; "explainyourself, for I really cannot tell what you mean."And she looked at D'Artagnan, who embraced her tenderly,with eyes which seemed to burn themselves away.

    "Yes; I am a man of honor," said D'Artagnan, determined tocome to an end, "and since your love is mine, and I amsatisfied I possess it--for I do possess it, do I not?""Entirely; go on."

    "Well, I feel as if transformed--a confession weighs on mymind."

    "A confession!"

    "If I had the least doubt of your love I would not make it,but you love me, my beautiful mistress, do you not?""Without doubt."

    "Then if through excess of love I have rendered myselfculpable toward you, you will pardon me?"

    "Perhaps."

    D'Artagnan tried with his sweetest smile to touch his lipsto Milady's, but she evaded him.

    "This confession," said she, growing paler, "what is thisconfession?"

    "You gave De Wardes a meeting on Thursday last in this veryroom, did you not?"

    "No, no! It is not true," said Milady, in a tone of voice sofirm, and with a countenance so unchanged, that ifD'Artagnan had not been in such perfect possession of thefact, he would have doubted.

    "Do not lie, my angel," said D'Artagnan, smiling; "thatwould be useless."

    "What do you mean?  Speak! you kill me."

    "Be satisfied; you are not guilty toward me, and I havealready pardoned you."

    "What next? what next?"

    "De Wardes cannot boast of anything."

    "How is that?  You told me yourself that that ring--""That ring I have! The Comte de Wardes of Thursday and theD'Artagnan of today are the same person."

    The imprudent young man expected a surprise, mixed withshame--a slight storm which would resolve itself into tears;but he was strangely deceived, and his error was not of longduration.

    Pale and trembling, Milady repulsed D'Artagnan's attemptedembrace by a violent blow on the chest, as she sprang out ofbed.

    It was almost broad daylight.

    D'Artagnan detained her by her night dress of fine Indialinen, to implore her pardon; but she, with a strongmovement, tried to escape.  Then the cambric was torn fromher beautiful shoulders; and on one of those lovelyshoulders, round and white, D'Artagnan recognized, withinexpressible astonishment, the FLEUR-DE-LIS--that indeliblemark which the hand of the infamous executioner hadimprinted.

    "Great God!" cried D'Artagnan, loosing his hold of herdress, and remaining mute, motionless, and frozen.But Milady felt herself denounced even by his terror.  Hehad doubtless seen all.  The young man now knew her secret,her terrible secret--the secret she concealed even from hermaid with such care, the secret of which all the world wasignorant, except himself.

    She turned upon him, no longer like a furious woman, butlike a wounded panther.

    "Ah, wretch!" cried she, "you have basely betrayed me, andstill more, you have my secret!  You shall die."

    And she flew to a little inlaid casket which stood upon thedressing table, opened it with a feverish and tremblingband, drew from it a small poniard, with a golden haft and asharp thin blade, and then threw herself with a bound uponD'Artagnan.

    Although the young man was brave, as we know, he wasterrified at that wild countenance, those terribly dilatedpupils, those pale cheeks, and those bleeding lips.  Herecoiled to the other side of the room as he would have donefrom a serpent which was crawling toward him, and his swordcoming in contact with his nervous hand, he drew it almostunconsciously from the scabbard.  But without taking anyheed of the sword, Milady endeavored to get near enough tohim to stab him, and did not stop till she felt the sharppoint at her throat.

    She then tried to seize the sword with her hands; butD'Artagnan kept it free from her grasp, and presenting thepoint, sometimes at her eyes, sometimes at her breast,compelled her to glide behind the bedstead, while he aimedat making his retreat by the door which led to Kitty'sapartment.

    Milady during this time continued to strike at him withhorrible fury, screaming in a formidable way.

    As all this, however, bore some resemblance to a duel,D'Artagnan began to recover himself little by little."Well, beautiful lady, very well," said be; "but, PARDIEU,if you don't calm yourself, I will design a secondFLEUR-DE-LIS upon one of those pretty checks!"

    "Scoundrel, infamous scoundrel!" howled Milady.

    But D'Artagnan, still keeping on the defensive, drew near toKitty's door.  At the noise they made, she in overturningthe furniture in her efforts to get at him, he in screeninghimself behind the furniture to keep out of her reach, Kittyopened the door.  D'Artagnan, who had unceasingly maneuveredto gain this point, was not at more than three paces fromit.  With one spring he flew from the chamber of Milady intothat of the maid, and quick as lightning, he slammed to thedoor, and placed all his weight against it, while Kittypushed the bolts.

    Then Milady attempted to tear down the doorcase, with astrength apparently above that of a woman; but finding shecould not accomplish this, she in her fury stabbed at thedoor with her poniard, the point of which repeatedlyglittered through the wood. Every blow was accompanied withterrible imprecations.

    "Quick, Kitty, quick!" said D'Artagnan, in a low voice, assoon as the bolts were fast, "let me get out of the hotel;for if we leave her time to turn round, she will have mekilled by the servants."

    "But you can't go out so," said Kitty; "you are naked.""That's true," said D'Artagnan, then first thinking of thecostume he found himself in, "that's true.  But dress me aswell as you are able, only make haste; think, my dear girl,it's life and death!"

    Kitty was but too well aware of that.  In a turn of the handshe muffled him up in a flowered robe, a large hood, and acloak.  She gave him some slippers, in which he placed hisnaked feet, and then conducted him down the stairs.  It wastime.  Milady had already rung her bell, and roused thewhole hotel.  The porter was drawing the cord at the momentMilady cried from her window, "Don't open!"

    The young man fled while she was still threatening him withan impotent gesture.  The moment she lost sight of him,Milady tumbled fainting into her chamber.

    38  HOW, WIHTOUT INCOMMODING HIMSELF, ATHOS PROCURES HIA EQUIPMENTD'Artagnan was so completely bewildered that without takingany heed of what might become of Kitty he ran at full speedacross half Paris, and did not stop till he came to Athos'sdoor.  The confusion of his mind, the terror which spurredhim on, the cries of some of the patrol who started inpursuit of him, and the hooting of the people who,notwithstanding the early hour, were going to their work,only made him precipitate his course.

    He crossed the court, ran up the two flights to Athos'sapartment, and knocked at the door enough to break it down.Grimaud came, rubbing his half-open eyes, to answer thisnoisy summons, and D'Artagnan sprang with such violence intothe room as nearly to overturn the astonished lackey.In spite of his habitual silence, the poor lad this timefound his speech.

    "Holloa, there!" cried he; "what do you want, you strumpet?What's your business here, you hussy?"

    D'Artagnan threw off his hood, and disengaged his hands fromthe folds of the cloak.  At sight of the mustaches and thenaked sword, the poor devil perceived he had to deal with aman.  He then concluded it must be an assassin.

    "Help! murder! help!" cried he.

    "Hold your tongue, you stupid fellow!" said the young man; "I amD'Artagnan; don't you know me?  Where is your master?""You, Monsieur D'Artagnan!" cried Grimaud, "impossible.""Grimaud," said Athos, coming out of his apartment in adressing gown, "Grimaud, I thought I heard you permittingyourself to speak?"

    "Ah, monsieur, it is--"

    "Silence!"

    Grimaud contented himself with pointing D'Artagnan out tohis master with his finger.

    Athos recognized his comrade, and phlegmatic as he was, heburst into a laugh which was quite excused by the strangemasquerade before his eyes--petticoats falling over hisshoes, sleeves tucked up, and mustaches stiff withagitation.

    "Don't laugh, my friend!" cried D'Artagnan; "for heaven'ssake, don't laugh, for upon my soul, it's no laughingmatter!"

    And he pronounced these words with such a solemn air andwith such a real appearance of terror, that Athos eagerlyseized his hand, crying, "Are you wounded, my friend?  Howpale you are!"

    "No, but I have just met with a terrible adventure!  Are youalone, Athos?"

    "PARBLEU! whom do you expect to find with me at this hour?""Well, well!" and D'Artagnan rushed into Athos's chamber."Come, speak!" said the latter, closing the door and boltingit, that they might not be disturbed.  "Is the king dead?Have you killed the cardinal?  You are quite upset!  Come,come, tell me; I am dying with curiosity and uneasiness!""Athos," said D'Artagnan, getting rid of his femalegarments, and appearing in his shirt, "prepare yourself tohear an incredible, an unheard-of story."

    "Well, but put on this dressing gown first," said theMusketeer to his friend.

    D'Artagnan donned the robe as quickly as he could, mistakingone sleeve for the other, so greatly was he still agitated."Well?" said Athos.

    "Well," replied D'Artagnan, bending his mouth to Athos'sear, and lowering his voice, "Milady is marked with aFLEUR-DE-LIS upon her shoulder!"

    "Ah!" cried the Musketeer, as if he had received a ball inhis heart.

    "Let us see," said D'Artagnan.  "Are you SURE that the OTHERis dead?"

    "THE OTHER?" said Athos, in so stifled a voice thatD'Artagnan scarcely heard him.

    "Yes, she of whom you told me one day at Amiens."Athos uttered a groan, and let his head sink on his hands."This is a woman of twenty-six or twenty-eight years.""Fair," said Athos, "is she not?"

    "Very."

    "Blue and clear eyes, of a strange brilliancy, with blackeyelids and eyebrows?"

    "Yes."

    "Tall, well-made?  She has lost a tooth, next to theeyetooth on the left?"

    "Yes."

    "The FLEUR-DE-LIS is small, rosy in color, and looks as ifefforts had been made to efface it by the application ofpoultices?"

    "Yes."

    "But you say she is English?"

    "She is called Milady, but she may be French.  Lord deWinter is only her brother-in-law,"

    "I will see her, D'Artagnan!"

    "Beware, Athos, beware.  You tried to kill her; she is awoman to return you the like, and not to fail."

    "She will not dare to say anything; that would be todenounce herself."

    "She is capable of anything or everything.  Did you ever seeher furious?"

    "No," said Athos.

    "A tigress, a panther! Ah, my dear Athos, I am greatlyafraid I have drawn a terrible vengeance on both of us!"D'Artagnan then related all--the mad passion of Milady andher menaces of death.

    "You are right; and upon my soul, I would give my life for ahair," said Athos.  "Fortunately, the day after tomorrow weleave Paris.  We are going according to all probability toLa Rochelle, and once gone--"

    "She will follow you to the end of the world, Athos, if sherecognizes you.  Let her, then, exhaust her vengeance on mealone!"

    "My dear friend, of what consequence is it if she kills me?"said Athos.  "Do you, perchance, think I set any great storeby life?"

    "There is something horribly mysterious under all this,Athos; this woman is one of the cardinal's spies, I am sureof that."

    "In that case, take care! If the cardinal does not hold youin high admiration for the affair of London, he entertains agreat hatred for you; but as, considering everything, hecannot accuse you openly, and as hatred must be satisfied,particularly when it's a cardinal's hatred, take care ofyourself.  If you go out, do not go out alone; when you eat,use every precaution.  Mistrust everything, in short, evenyour own shadow."

    "Fortunately," said D'Artagnan, "all this will be onlynecessary till after tomorrow evening, for when once withthe army, we shall have, I hope, only men to dread.""In the meantime," said Athos, "I renounce my plan ofseclusion, and wherever you go, I will go with you.  Youmust return to the Rue des Fossoyeurs; I will accompanyyou."

    "But however near it may be," replied D'Artagnan, "I cannotgo thither in this quise."

    "That's true," said Athos, and he rang the bell.

    Grimaud entered.

    Athos made him a sign to go to D'Artagnan's residence, andbring back some clothes.  Grimaud replied by another signthat be understood perfectly, and set off.

    "All this will not advance your outfit," said Athos; "for ifI am not mistaken, you have left the best of your apparelwith Milady, and she will certainly not have the politenessto return it to you.  Fortunately, you have the sapphire.""The jewel is yours, my dear Athos!  Did you not tell me itwas a family jewel?"

    "Yes, my grandfather gave two thousand crowns for it, as heonce told me.  It formed part of the nuptial present he madehis wife, and it is magnificent.  My mother gave it to me,and I, fool as I was, instead of keeping the ring as a holyrelic, gave it to this wretch."

    "Then, my friend, take back this ring, to which I see youattach much value."

    "I take back the ring, after it has passed through the handsof that infamous creature Never; that ring is defiled,D'Artagnan.

    "Sell it, then."

    "Sell a jewel which came from my mother! I vow I shouldconsider it a profanation."

    "Pledge it, then; you can borrow at least a thousand crownson it.  With that sum you can extricate yourself from yourpresent difficulties; and when you are full of money again,you can redeem it, and take it back cleansed from itsancient stains, as it will have passed through the hands ofusurers."

    Athos smiled.

    "You are a capital companion, D'Artagnan," said be; "yournever-failing cheerfulness raises poor souls in affliction.Well, let us pledge the ring, but upon one condition.""What?"

    "That there shall be five hundred crowns for you, and fivehundred crowns for me."

    "Don't dream it, Athos.  I don't need the quarter of such asum--I who am still only in the Guards--and by selling mysaddles, I shall procure it.  What do I want?  A horse forPlanchet, that's all.  Besides, you forget that I have aring likewise."

    "To which you attach more value, it seems, than I do tomine; at least, I have thought so."

    "Yes, for in any extreme circumstance it might not onlyextricate us from some great embarrassment, but even a greatdanger.  It is not only a valuable diamond, but it is anenchanted talisman."

    "I don't at all understand you, but I believe all you say tobe true.  Let us return to my ring, or rather to yours.  Youshall take half the sum that will be advanced upon it, or Iwill throw it into the Seine; and I doubt, as was the casewith Polycrates, whether any fish will be sufficientlycomplaisant to bring it back to us."

    "Well, I will take it, then," said D'Artagnan.

    At this moment Grimaud returned, accompanied by Planchet;the latter, anxious about his master and curious to knowwhat had happened to him, had taken advantage of theopportunity and brought the garments himself.

    D'Artagnan dressed himself, and Athos did the same.  Whenthe two were ready to go out, the latter made Grimaud thesign of a man taking aim, and the lackey immediately tookdown his musketoon, and prepared to follow his master.They arrived without accident at the Rue des Fossoyeurs.Bonacieux was standing at the door, and looked at D'Artagnanhatefully.

    "Make haste, dear lodger," said he; "there is a very prettygirl waiting for you upstairs; and you know women don't liketo be kept waiting."

    "That's Kitty!" said D'Artagnan to himself, and darted intothe passage.

    Sure enough! Upon the landing leading to the chamber, andcrouching against the door, he found the poor girl, all in atremble.  As soon as she perceived him, she cried, "You havepromised your protection; you have promised to save me fromher anger.  Remember, it is you who have ruined me!""Yes, yes, to be sure, Kitty," said D'Artagnan; "be at ease,my girl.  But what happened after my departure?"

    "How can I tell!" said Kitty.  "The lackeys were brought bythe cries she made.  She was mad with passion.  There existno imprecations she did not pour out against you.  Then Ithought she would remember it was through my chamber you hadpenetrated hers, and that then she would suppose I was youraccomplice; so I took what little money I had and the bestof my things, and I got away.

    "Poor dear girl! But what can I do with you?  I am goingaway the day after tomorrow."

    "Do what you please, Monsieur Chevalier.  Help me out ofParis; help me out of France!"

    "I cannot take you, however, to the siege of La Rochelle,"aid D'Artagnan.

    "No; but you can place me in one of the provinces with somelady of your acquaintance--in your own country, forinstance."

    "My dear little love!  In my country the ladies do withoutchambermaids.  But stop!  I can manage your business foryou.  Planchet, go and find Aramis.  Request him to comehere directly.  We have something very important to say tohim."

    "I understand," said Athos; "but why not Porthos?  I shouldhave thought that his duchess--"

    "Oh, Porthos's duchess is dressed by her husband's clerks,"said D'Artagnan, laughing.  "Besides, Kitty would not liketo live in the Rue aux Ours.  Isn't it so, Kitty?""I do not care where I live," said Kitty, "provided I amwell concealed, and nobody knows where I am."

    "Meanwhile, Kitty, when we are about to separate, and youare no longer jealous of me--"

    "Monsieur Chevalier, far off or near," said Kitty, "I shallalways love you."

    "Where the devil will constancy niche itself next?" murmuredAthos.

    "And I, also," said D'Artagnan, "I also.  I shall alwayslove you; be sure of that.  But now answer me.  I attachgreat importance to the question I am about to put to you.Did you never hear talk of a young woman who was carried offone night?"

    "There, now!  Oh, Monsieur Chevalier, do you love that womanstill?"

    "No, no; it is one of my friends who loves her--MonsieurAthos, this gentleman here."

    "I?" cried Athos, with an accent like that of a man whoperceives he is about to tread upon an adder.

    "You, to be sure!" said D'Artagnan, pressing Athos's hand."You know the interest we both take in this poor littleMadame Bonacieux.  Besides, Kitty will tell nothing; willyou, Kitty?  You understand, my dear girl," continuedD'Artagnan, "she is the wife of that frightful baboon yousaw at the door as you came in."

    "Oh, my God!  You remind me of my fright!  If he should haveknown me again!"

    "How? know you again?  Did you ever see that man before?""He came twice to Milady's."

    "That's it.  About what time?"

    "Why, about fifteen or eighteen days ago."

    "Exactly so."

    "And yesterday evening he came again."

    "Yesterday evening?"

    "Yes, just before you came."

    "My dear Athos, we are enveloped in a network of spies.  Anddo you believe he knew you again, Kitty?"

    "I pulled down my hood as soon as I saw him, but perhaps itwas too

    late."

    "Go down, Athos--he mistrusts you less than me--and see if hebe still at his door."

    Athos went down and returned immediately.

    "He has gone," said he, "and the house door is shut.""He has gone to make his report, and to say that all thepigeons are at this moment in the dovecot"

    "Well, then, let us all fly," said Athos, "and leave nobodyhere but Planchet to bring us news."

    "A minute.  Aramis, whom we have sent for!"

    "That's true," said Athos; "we must wait for Aramis."At that moment Aramis entered.

    The matter was all explained to him, and the friends gavehim to understand that among all his high connections hemust find a place for Kitty.

    Aramis reflected for a minute, and then said, coloring,"Will it be really rendering you a service, D'Artagnan?""I shall be grateful to you all my life."

    "Very well.  Madame de Bois-Tracy asked me, for one of herfriends who resides in the provinces, I believe, for atrustworthy maid.  If you can, my dear D'Artagnan, answerfor Mademoiselle-"

    "Oh, monsieur, be assured that I shall be entirely devotedto the person who will give me the means of quitting Paris.""Then," said Aramis, "this falls out very well."

    He placed himself at the table and wrote a little note whichhe sealed with a ring, and gave the billet to Kitty."And now, my dear girl," said D'Artagnan, "you know that itis not good for any of us to be here.  Therefore let usseparate.  We shall meet again in better days."

    "And whenever we find each other, in whatever place it maybe," said Kitty, "you will find me loving you as I love youtoday."

    "Dicers' oaths!" said Athos, while D'Artagnan went toconduct Kitty downstairs.

    An instant afterward the three young men separated, agreeingto meet again at four o'clock with Athos, and leavingPlanchet to guard the house.

    Aramis returned home, and Athos and D'Artagnan busiedthemselves about pledging the sapphire.

    As the Gascon had foreseen, they easily obtained threehundred pistoles on the ring.  Still further, the Jew toldthem that if they would sell it to him, as it would make amagnificent pendant for earrings, he would give five hundredpistoles for it.

    Athos and D'Artagnan, with the activity of two soldiers andthe knowledge of two connoisseurs, hardly required threehours to purchase the entire equipment of the Musketeer.Besides, Athos was very easy, and a noble to his fingers'ends.  When a thing suited him he paid the price demanded,without thinking to ask for any abatement.  D'Artagnan wouldhave remonstrated at this; but Athos put his hand upon hisshoulder, with a smile, and D'Artagnan understood that itwas all very well for such a little Gascon gentleman ashimself to drive a bargain, but not for a man who had thebearing of a prince.  The Musketeer met with a superbAndalusian horse, black as jet, nostrils of fire, legs cleanand elegant, rising six years.  He examined him, and foundhim sound and without blemish.  They asked a thousand livresfor him.

    He might perhaps have been bought for less; but whileD'Artagnan was discussing the price with the dealer, Athoswas counting out the money on the table.

    Grimaud had a stout, short Picard cob, which cost threehundred livres.

    But when the saddle and arms for Grimaud were purchased,Athos had not a son left of his hundred and fifty pistoles.D'Artagnan offered his friend a part of his share which heshould return when convenient.

    But Athos only replied to this proposal by shrugging hisshoulders.

    "How much did the Jew say he would give for the sapphire ifbe purchased it?" said Athos.

    "Five hundred pistoles."

    "That is to say, two hundred more--a hundred pistoles for youand a hundred pistoles for me.  Well, now, that would be areal fortune to us, my friend; let us go back to the Jew'sagain."

    "What!  "will you--"

    "This ring would certainly only recall very bitterremembrances; then we shall never be masters of threehundred pistoles to redeem it, so that we really should losetwo hundred pistoles by the bargain.  Go and tell him thering is his, D'Artagnan, and bring back the two hundredpistoles with you."

    "Reflect, Athos!"

    "Ready money is needful for the present time, and we mustlearn how to make sacrifices.  Go, D'Artagnan, go; Grimaudwill accompany you with his musketoon."

    A half hour afterward, D'Artagnan returned with the twothousand livres, and without having met with any accident.It was thus Athos found at home resources which he did notexpect.

    39  A VISION

    At four o'clock the four friends were all assembled withAthos.  Their anxiety about their outfits had alldisappeared, and each countenance only preserved theexpression of its own secret disquiet--for behind all presenthappiness is concealed a fear for the future.

    Suddenly Planchet entered, bringing two letters forD'Artagnan.

    The one was a little billet, genteelly folded, with a prettyseal in green wax on which was impressed a dove bearing agreen branch.

    The other was a large square epistle, resplendent with theterrible arms of his Eminence the cardinal duke.

    At the sight of the little letter the heart of D'Artagnanbounded, for he believed he recognized the handwriting, andalthough he had seen that writing but once, the memory of itremained at the bottom of his heart.

    He therefore seized the little epistle, and opened iteagerly.

    "Be," said the letter, "on Thursday next, at from six toseven o'clock in the evening, on the road to Chaillot, andlook carefully into the carriages that pass; but if you haveany consideration for your own life or that of those wholove you, do not speak a single word, do not make a movementwhich may lead anyone to believe you have recognized her whoexposes herself to everything for the sake of seeing you butfor an instant."

    No signature.

    "That's a snare," said Athos; "don't go, D'Artagnan.""And yet," replied D'Artagnan, "I think I recognize thewriting."

    "It may be counterfeit," said Athos.  "Between six and seveno'clock the road of Chaillot is quite deserted; you might aswell go and ride in the forest of Bondy."

    "But suppose we all go," said D'Artagnan; "what the devil!They won't devour us all four, four lackeys, horses, arms,and all!"

    "And besides, it will be a chance for displaying our newequipments," said Porthos.

    "But if it is a woman who writes," said Aramis, "and thatwoman desires not to be seen, remember, you compromise her,D'Artagnan; which is not the part of a gentleman.""We will remain in the background," said Porthos, "and hewill advance alone."

    "Yes; but a pistol shot is easily fired from a carriagewhich goes at a gallop."

    "Bah!" said D'Artagnan, "they will miss me; if they fire wewill ride after the carriage, and exterminate those who maybe in it.  They must be enemies."

    "He is right," said Porthos; "battle.  Besides, we must tryour now arms."

    "Bah, let us enjoy that pleasure," said Aramis, with hismild and careless manner.

    "As you please," said Athos.

    "Gentlemen," said D'Artagnan, "it is half past four, and wehave scarcely time to be on the road of Chaillot by six.""Besides, if we go out too late, nobody will see us," saidPorthos, "and that will be a pity.  Let us get ready,gentlemen."

    "But this second letter," said Athos, "you forget that; itappears to me, however, that the seal denotes that itdeserves to be opened.  For my part, I declare, D'Artagnan,I think it of much more consequence than the little piece ofwaste paper you have so cunningly slipped into your bosom."D'Artagnan blushed.

    "Well," said he, "let us see, gentlemen, what are hisEminence's commands," and D'Artagnan unsealed the letter andread,

    "M. D'Artagnan, of the king's Guards, company Dessessart, isexpected at the Palais-Cardinal this evening, at eighto'clock.

    "La Houdiniere, CAPTAIN OF THE GUARDS"

    "The devil!" said Athos; "here's a rendezvous much moreserious than the other."

    "I will go to the second after attending the first," saidD'Artagnan.  "One is for seven o'clock, and the other foreight; there will be time for both."

    "Hum!  I would not go at all," said Aramis.  "A gallantknight cannot decline a rendezvous with a lady; but aprudent gentleman may excuse himself from not waiting on hisEminence, particularly when he has reason to believe he isnot invited to make his compliments."

    "I am of Aramis's opinion," said Porthos.

    "Gentlemen," replied D'Artagnan, "I have already received byMonsieur de Cavois a similar invitation from his Eminence.I neglected it, and on the morrow a serious misfortunehappened to me--Constance disappeared.  Whatever may ensue, Iwill go."

    "If you are determined," said Athos, "do so."

    "But the Bastille?" said Aramis.

    "Bah! you will get me out if they put me there," saidD'Artagnan.

    "To be sure we will," replied Aramis and Porthos, withadmirable promptness and decision, as if that were thesimplest thing in the world, "to be sure we will get youout; but meantime, as we are to set off the day aftertomorrow, you would do much better not to risk thisBastille."

    "Let us do better than that," said Athos; "do not let usleave him during the whole evening.  Let each of us wait ata gate of the palace with three Musketeers behind him; if wesee a close carriage, at all suspicious in appearance, comeout, let us fall upon it. It is a long time since we havehad a skirmish with the Guards of Monsieur the Cardinal;Monsieur de Treville must think us dead."

    "To a certainty, Athos," said Aramis, "you were meant to bea general of the army!  What do you think of the plan,gentlemen?"

    "Admirable!" replied the young men in chorus.

    "Well," said Porthos, "I will run to the hotel, and engageour comrades to hold themselves in readiness by eighto'clock; the rendezvous, the Place du Palais-Cardinal.Meantime, you see that the lackeys saddle the horses.""I have no horse," said D'Artagnan; "but that is of noconsequence, I can take one of Monsieur de Treville's.""That is not worth while," said Aramis, "you can have one ofmine."

    "One of yours! how many have you, then?" asked D'Artagnan."Three," replied Aramis, smiling.

    "Certes," cried Athos, "you are the best-mounted poet ofFrance or Navarre."

    "Well, my dear Aramis, you don't want three horses?  Icannot comprehend what induced you to buy three!""Therefore I only purchased two," said Aramis.

    "The third, then, fell from the clouds, I suppose?""No, the third was brought to me this very morning by agroom out of livery, who would not tell me in whose servicehe was, and who said he had received orders from hismaster."

    "Or his mistress," interrupted D'Artagnan.

    "That makes no difference," said Aramis, coloring; "and whoaffirmed, as I said, that he had received orders from hismaster or mistress to place the horse in my stable, withoutinforming me whence it came."

    "It is only to poets that such things happen," said Athos,gravely.

    "Well, in that case, we can manage famously," saidD'Artagnan; "which of the two horses will you ride--thatwhich you bought or the one that was given to you?""That which was given to me, assuredly.  You cannot for amoment imagine, D'Artagnan, that I would commit such anoffense toward--"

    "The unknown giver," interrupted D'Artagnan.

    "Or the mysterious benefactress," said Athos.

    "The one you bought will then become useless to you?""Nearly so."

    "And you selected it yourself?"

    "With the greatest care.  The safety of the horseman, youknow, depends almost always upon the goodness of his horse.""Well, transfer it to me at the price it cost you?""I was going to make you the offer, my dear D'Artagnan,giving you all the time necessary for repaying me such atrifle."

    "How much did it cost you?"

    "Eight hundred livres."

    "Here are forty double pistoles, my dear friend," saidD'Artagnan, taking the sum from his pocket; "I know that isthe coin in which you were paid for your poems."

    "You are rich, then?" said Aramis.

    "Rich?  Richest, my dear fellow!"

    And D'Artagnan chinked the remainder of his pistoles in hispocket.

    "Send your saddle, then, to the hotel of the Musketeers, andyour horse can be brought back with ours."

    "Very well; but it is already five o'clock, so make haste."A quarter of an hour afterward Porthos appeared at the endof the Rue Ferou on a very handsome genet.  Mousquetonfollowed him upon an Auvergne horse, small but veryhandsome.  Porthos was resplendent with joy and pride.At the same time, Aramis made his appearance at the otherend of the street upon a superb English charger.  Bazinfollowed him upon a roan, holding by the halter a vigorousMecklenburg horse; this was D'Artagnan mount.

    The two Musketeers met at the gate.  Athos and D'Artagnanwatched their approach from the window.

    "The devil!" cried Aramis, "you have a magnificent horsethere, Porthos."

    "Yes," replied Porthos, "it is the one that ought to havebeen sent to me at first.  A bad joke of the husband'ssubstituted the other; but the husband has been punishedsince, and I have obtained full satisfaction."

    Planchet and Grimaud appeared in their turn, leading theirmasters' steeds.  D'Artagnan and Athos put themselves intosaddle with their companions, and all four set forward;Athos upon a horse he owed to a woman, Aramis on a horse heowed to his mistress, Porthos on a horse he owed to hisprocurator's wife, and D'Artagnan on a horse he owed to hisgood fortune--the best mistress possible.

    The lackeys followed.

    As Porthos had foreseen, the cavalcade produced a goodeffect; and if Mme.  Coquenard had met Porthos and seen whata superb appearance he made upon his handsome Spanish genet,she would not have regretted the bleeding she had inflictedupon the strongbox of her husband.

    Near the Louvre the four friends met with M. de Treville,who was returning from St. Germain; he stopped them to offerhis compliments upon their appointments, which in an instantdrew round them a hundred gapers.

    D'Artagnan profited by the circumstance to speak to M. deTreville of the letter with the great red seal and thecardinal's arms.  It is well understood that he did notbreathe a word about the other.

    M. de Treville approved of the resolution he had adopted,and assured him that if on the morrow he did not appear, hehimself would undertake to find him, let him be where hemight.

    At this moment the clock of La Samaritaine struck six; thefour friends pleaded an engagement, and took leave of M. deTreville.

    A short gallop brought them to the road of Chaillot; the daybegan to decline, carriages were passing and repassing.D'Artagnan, keeping at some distance from his friends,darted a scrutinizing glance into every carriage thatappeared, but saw no face with which he was acquainted.At length, after waiting a quarter of an hour and just astwilight was beginning to thicken, a carriage appeared,coming at a quick pace on the road of Sevres.  A

    presentiment instantly told D'Artagnan that this carriagecontained the person who had appointed the rendezvous; theyoung man was himself astonished to find his heart beat soviolently.  Almost instantly a female head was put out atthe window, with two fingers placed upon her mouth, eitherto enjoin silence or to send him a kiss.  D'Artagnan uttereda slight cry of joy; this woman, or rather this apparition--for the carriage passed with the rapidity of a vision--wasMme. Bonacieux.

    By an involuntary movement and in spite of the injunctiongiven, D'Artagnan put his horse into a gallop, and in a fewstrides overtook the carriage; but the window washermetically closed, the vision had disappeared.

    D'Artagnan then remembered the injunction: "If you valueyour own life or that of those who love you, remainmotionless, and as if you had seen nothing."

    He stopped, therefore, trembling not for himself but for thepoor woman who had evidently exposed herself to great dangerby appointing this rendezvous.

    The carriage pursued its way, still going at a great pace,till it dashed into Paris, and disappeared.

    D'Artagnan remained fixed to the spot, astounded and notknowing what to think.  If it was Mme.  Bonacieux and if shewas returning to Paris, why this fugitive rendezvous, whythis simple exchange of a glance, why this lost kiss?  If,on the other side, it was not she--which was still quitepossible--for the little light that remained rendered amistake easy--might it not be the commencement of some plotagainst him through the allurement of this woman, for whomhis love was known?

    His three companions joined him.  All had plainly seen awoman's head appear at the window, but none of them, exceptAthos, knew Mme.  Bonacieux.  The opinion of Athos was thatit was indeed she; but less preoccupied by that pretty facethan D'Artagnan, he had fancied he saw a second head, aman's head, inside the carriage.

    "If that be the case," said D'Artagnan, "they are doubtlesstransporting her from one prison to another.  But what canthey intend to do with the poor creature, and how shall Iever meet her again?"

    "Friend," said Athos, gravely, "remember that it is the deadalone with whom we are not likely to meet again on thisearth.  You know something of that, as well as I do, Ithink.  Now, if your mistress is not dead, if it is she wehave just seen, you will meet with her again some day orother.  And perhaps, my God!" added he, with thatmisanthropic tone which was peculiar to him, "perhaps soonerthan you wish."

    Half past seven had sounded.  The carriage had been twentyminutes behind the time appointed.  D'Artagnan's friendsreminded him that he had a visit to pay, but at the sametime bade him observe that there was yet time to retract.But D'Artagnan was at the same time impetuous and curious.He had made up his mind that he would go to the Palais-Cardinal, and that he would learn what his Eminence had tosay to him.  Nothing could turn him from his purpose.They reached the Rue St. Honore, and in the Place du Palais-Cardinal they found the twelve invited Musketeers, walkingabout in expectation of their comrades.  There only theyexplained to them the matter in hand.

    D'Artagnan was well known among the honorable corps of theking's Musketeers, in which it was known he would one daytake his place; he was considered beforehand as a comrade.It resulted from these antecedents that everyone enteredheartily into the purpose for which they met; besides, itwould not be unlikely that they would have an opportunity ofplaying either the cardinal or his people an ill turn, andfor such expeditions these worthy gentlemen were alwaysready.

    Athos divided them into three groups, assumed the command ofone, gave the second to Aramis, and the third to Porthos;and then each group went and took their watch near anentrance.

    D'Artagnan, on his part, entered boldly at the principalgate.

    Although he felt himself ably supported, the young man wasnot without a little uneasiness as he ascended the greatstaircase, step by step.  His conduct toward Milady bore astrong resemblance to treachery, and he was very suspiciousof the political relations which existed between that womanand the cardinal.  Still further, De Wardes, whom he hadtreated so ill, was one of the tools of his Eminence; andD'Artagnan knew that while his Eminence was terrible to hisenemies, he was strongly attached to his friends."If De Wardes has related all our affair to the cardinal,which is not to be doubted, and if he has recognized me, asis probable, I may consider myself almost as a condemnedman," said D'Artagnan, shaking his head.  "But why has hewaited till now?  That's all plain enough.  Milady has laidher complaints against me with that hypocritical grief whichrenders her so interesting, and this last offense has madethe cup overflow."

    "Fortunately," added he, "my good friends are down yonder,and they will not allow me to be carried away without astruggle.  Nevertheless, Monsieur de Treville's company ofMusketeers alone cannot maintain a war against the cardinal,who disposes of the forces of all France, and before whomthe queen is without power and the king without will.D'Artagnan, my friend, you are brave, you are prudent, youhave excellent qualities; but the women will ruin you!"He came to this melancholy conclusion as he entered theantechamber.  He placed his letter in the hands of the usheron duty, who led him into the waiting room and passed oninto the interior of the palace.

    In this waiting room were five or six of the cardinalsGuards, who recognized D'Artagnan, and knowing that it washe who had wounded Jussac, they looked upon him with a smileof singular meaning.

    This smile appeared to D'Artagnan to be of bad augury.Only, as our Gascon was not easily intimidated--or rather,thanks to a great pride natural to the men of his country,he did not allow one easily to see what was passing in hismind when that which was passing at all resembled fear--heplaced himself haughtily in front of Messieurs the Guards,and waited with his hand on his hip, in an attitude by nomeans deficient in majesty.

    The usher returned and made a sign to D'Artagnan to followhim.  It appeared to the young man that the Guards, onseeing him depart, chuckled among themselves.

    He traversed a corridor, crossed a grand saloon, entered alibrary, and found himself in the presence of a man seatedat a desk and writing.

    The usher introduced him, and retired without speaking aword.  D'Artagnan remained standing and examined this man.D'Artagnan at first believed that he had to do with somejudge examining his papers; but he perceived that the man atthe desk wrote, or rather corrected, lines of unequallength, scanning the words on his fingers.  He saw then thathe was with a poet.  At the end of an instant the poetclosed his manuscript, upon the cover of which was written"Mirame, a Tragedy in Five Acts," and raised his head.D'Artagnan recognized the cardinal.

    40  A Terrible Vision

    The cardinal leaned his elbow on his manuscript, his cheekupon his hand, and looked intently at the young man for amoment.  No one had a more searching eye than the Cardinalde Richelieu, and D'Artagnan felt this glance run throughhis veins like a fever.

    He however kept a good countenance, holding his hat in hishand and awaiting the good pleasure of his Eminence, withouttoo much assurance, but also without too much humility."Monsieur," said the cardinal, "are you a D'Artagnan fromBearn?"

    "Yes, monseigneur," replied the young man.

    "There are several branches of the D'Artagnans at Tarbes andin its environs," said the cardinal; "to which do youbelong?"

    "I am the son of him who served in the Religious Wars underthe great King Henry, the father of his gracious Majesty.""That is well.  It is you who set out seven or eight monthsago from your country to seek your fortune in the capital?""Yes, monseigneur."

    "You came through Meung, where something befell you.  Idon't very well know what, but still something."

    "Monseigneur," said D'Artagnan, "this was what happened tome--"

    "Never mind, never mind!" resumed the cardinal, with a smilewhich indicated that he knew the story as well as he whowished to relate it.  "You were recommended to Monsieur deTreville, were you not?"

    "Yes, monseigneur; but in that unfortunate affair atMeung--"

    "The letter was lost," replied his Eminence; "yes, I knowthat.  But Monsieur de Treville is a skilled physiognomist,who knows men at first sight; and he placed you in thecompany of his brother-in-law, Monsieur Dessessart, leavingyou to hope that one day or other you should enter theMusketeers."

    "Monseigneur is correctly informed," said D'Artagnan."Since that time many things have happened to you.  You werewalking one day behind the Chartreux, when it would havebeen better if you had been elsewhere.  Then you took withyour friends a journey to the waters of Forges; they stoppedon the road, but you continued yours.  That is all verysimple: you had business in England."

    "Monseigneur," said D'Artagnan, quite confused, "I went--""Hunting at Windsor, or elsewhere--that concerns nobody.  Iknow, because it is my office to know everything.  On yourreturn you were received by an august personage, and Iperceive with pleasure that you preserve the souvenir shegave you."

    D'Artagnan placed his hand upon the queen's diamond, whichhe wore, and quickly turned the stone inward; but it was toolate.

    "The day after that, you received a visit from Cavois,"resumed the cardinal.  "He went to desire you to come to thepalace.  You have not returned that visit, and you werewrong."

    "Monseigneur, I feared I had incurred disgrace with yourEminence."

    "How could that be, monsieur?  Could you incur mydispleasure by having followed the orders of your superiorswith more intelligence and courage than another would havedone?  It is the people who do not obey that I punish, andnot those who, like you, obey--but too well.  As a proof,remember the date of the day on which I had you bidden tocome to me, and seek in your memory for what happened to youthat very night."

    That was the very evening when the abduction of Mme.Bonacieux took place.  D'Artagnan trembled; and he likewiserecollected that during the past half hour the poor womanhad passed close to him, without doubt carried away by thesame power that had caused her disappearance.

    "In short," continued the cardinal, "as I have heard nothingof you for some time past, I wished to know what you weredoing.  Besides, you owe me some thanks.  You must yourselfhave remarked how much you have been considered in all thecircumstances."

    D'Artagnan bowed with respect.

    "That," continued the cardinal, "arose not only from afeeling of natural equity, but likewise from a plan I havemarked out with respect to you."

    D'Artagnan became more and more astonished.

    "I wished to explain this plan to you on the day youreceived my first invitation; but you did not come.Fortunately, nothing is lost by this delay, and you are nowabout to hear it.  Sit down there, before me, d'Artagnan;you are gentleman enough not to listen standing."  And thecardinal pointed with his finger to a chair for the youngman, who was so astonished at what was passing that heawaited a second sign from his interlocutor before heobeyed.

    "You are brave, Monsieur d'Artagnan," continued hisEminence;  "you are prudent, which is still better.  I likemen of head and heart.  Don't be afraid," said he, smiling."By men of heart I mean men of courage. But young as youare, and scarcely entering into the world, you have powerfulenemies; if you do not take great heed, they will destroyyou."

    "Alas, monseigneur!" replied the young man, "very easily, nodoubt, for they are strong and well supported, while I amalone."

    "Yes, that's true; but alone as you are, you have done muchalready, and will do still more, I don't doubt.  Yet youhave need, I believe, to be guided in the adventurous careeryou have undertaken; for, if I mistake not, you came toParis with the ambitious idea of making your fortune.""I am at the age of extravagant hopes, monseigneur," saidD'Artagnan.

    "There are no extravagant but for fools, monsieur, and youare a man of understanding.  Now, what would you say to anensign's commission in my Guards, and a company after thecampaign?"

    "Ah, monseigneur."

    "You accept it, do you not?"

    "Monseigneur," replied D'Artagnan, with an embarrassed air."How?  You refuse?" cried the cardinal, with astonishment."I am in his Majesty's Guards, monseigneur, and I have noreason to be dissatisfied."

    "But it appears to me that my Guards--mine--are also hisMajesty's Guards; and whoever serves in a French corpsserves the king."

    "Monseigneur, your Eminence has ill understood my words.""You want a pretext, do you not?  I comprehend.  Well, youhave this excuse: advancement, the opening campaign, theopportunity which I offer you--so much for the world.  Asregards yourself, the need of protection; for it is fit youshould know, Monsieur d'Artagnan, that I have received heavyand serious complaints against you.  You do not consecrateyour days and nights wholly to the king's service."D'Artagnan colored.

    "In fact," said the cardinal, placing his hand upon a bundleof papers, "I have here a whole pile which concerns you.  Iknow you to be a man of resolution; and your services, welldirected, instead of leading you to ill, might be veryadvantageous to you.  Come; reflect, and decide.""Your goodness confounds me, monseigneur," repliedD'Artagnan, "and I am conscious of a greatness of soul inyour Eminence that makes me mean as an earthworm; but sinceMonseigneur permits me to speak freely--"

    D'Artagnan paused.

    "Yes; speak."

    "Then, I will presume to say that all my friends are in theking's Musketeers and Guards, and that by an inconceivablefatality my enemies are in the service of your Eminence; Ishould, therefore, be ill received here and ill regardedthere if I accepted what Monseigneur offers me."

    "Do you happen to entertain the haughty idea that I have notyet made you an offer equal to your value?" asked thecardinal, with a smile of disdain.

    "Monseigneur, your Eminence is a hundred times too kind tome;  and on the contrary, I think I have not proved myselfworthy of your goodness.  The siege of La Rochelle is aboutto be resumed, monseigneur.  I shall serve under the eye ofyour Eminence, and if I have the good fortune to conductmyself at the siege in such a manner as merits yourattention, then I shall at least leave behind me somebrilliant action to justify the protection with which youhonor me.  Everything is best in its time, monseigneur.Hereafter, perhaps, I shall have the right of giving myself;at present I shall appear to sell myself."

    "That is to say, you refuse to serve me, monsieur," said thecardinal, with a tone of vexation, through which, however,might be seen a sort of esteem; "remain free, then, andguard your hatreds and your sympathies."

    "Monseigneur--"

    "Well, well," said the cardinal, "I don't wish you any ill;but you must be aware that it is quite trouble enough todefend and recompense our friends.  We owe nothing to ourenemies; and let me give you a piece of advice; take care ofyourself, Monsieur d'Artagnan, for from the moment Iwithdraw my hand from behind you, I would not give an obolusfor your life."

    "I will try to do so, monseigneur," replied the Gascon, witha noble confidence.

    "Remember at a later period and at a certain moment, if anymischance should happen to you," said Richelieu,

    significantly, "that it was I who came to seek you, and thatI did all in my power to prevent this misfortune befallingyou."

    "I shall entertain, whatever may happen," said D'Artagnan,placing his hand upon his breast and bowing, "an eternalgratitude toward your Eminence for that which you now do forme."

    "Well, let it be, then, as you have said, Monsieurd'Artagnan; we shall see each other again after thecampaign.  I will have my eye upon you, for I shall bethere," replied the cardinal, pointing with his finger to amagnificent suit of armor he was to wear, "and on ourreturn, well--we will settle our account!"

    "Young man," said Richelieu, "if I shall be able to say toyou at another time what I have said to you today, I promiseyou to do so."

    This last expression of Richelieu's conveyed a terribledoubt; it alarmed D'Artagnan more than a menace would havedone, for it was a warning.  The cardinal, then, was seekingto preserve him from some misfortune which threatened him.He opened his mouth to reply, but with a haughty gesture thecardinal dismissed him.

    D'Artagnan went out, but at the door his heart almost failedhim, and he felt inclined to return.  Then the noble andsevere countenance of Athos crossed his mind; if he made thecompact with the cardinal which he required, Athos would nomore give him his hand--Athos would renounce him.It was this fear that restrained him, so powerful is theinfluence of a truly great character on all that surroundsit.

    D'Artagnan descended by the staircase at which he hadentered, and found Athos and the four Musketeers waiting hisappearance, and beginning to grow uneasy.  With a word,D'Artagnan reassured them; and Planchet ran to inform theother sentinels that it was useless to keep guard longer, ashis master had come out safe from the Palais-Cardinal.Returned home with Athos, Aramis and Porthos inquiredeagerly the cause of the strange interview; but D'Artagnanconfined himself to telling them that M. de Richelieu hadsent for him to propose to him to enter into his guards withthe rank of ensign, and that he had refused.

    "And you were right," cried Aramis and Porthos, with onevoice.

    Athos fell into a profound reverie and answered nothing.But when they were alone he said, "You have done that whichyou ought to have done, D'Artagnan; but perhaps you havebeen wrong."

    D'Artagnan sighed deeply, for this voice responded to asecret voice of his soul, which told him that greatmisfortunes awaited him.

    The whole of the next day was spent in preparations fordeparture.  D'Artagnan went to take leave of M. de Treville.At that time it was believed that the separation of theMusketeers and the Guards would be but momentary, the kingholding his Parliament that very day and proposing to setout the day after.  M. de Treville contented himself withasking D'Artagnan if he could do anything for him, butD'Artagnan answered that he was supplied with all he wanted.That night brought together all those comrades of the Guardsof M. Dessessart and the company of Musketeers of M. deTreville who had been accustomed to associate together.They were parting to meet again when it pleased God, and ifit pleased God.  That night, then, was somewhat riotous, asmay be imagined.  In such cases extreme preoccupation isonly to be combated by extreme carelessness.

    At the first sound of the morning trumpet the friendsseparated; the Musketeers hastening to the hotel of M. deTreville, the Guards to that of M. Dessessart.  Each of thecaptains then led his company to the Louvre, where the kingheld his review

    The king was dull and appeared ill, which detracted a littlefrom his usual lofty bearing.  In fact, the evening before,a fever had seized him in the midst of the Parliament, whilehe was holding his Bed of Justice.  He had, not the less,decided upon setting out that same evening; and in spite ofthe remonstrances that had been offered to him, he persistedin having the review, hoping by setting it at defiance toconquer the disease which began to lay hold upon him.The review over, the Guards set forward alone on theirmarch, the Musketeers waiting for the king, which allowedPorthos time to go and take a turn in his superb equipmentin the Rue aux Ours.

    The procurator's wife saw him pass in his new uniform and onhis fine horse.  She loved Porthos too dearly to allow himto part thus; she made him a sign to dismount and come toher.  Porthos was magnificent; his spurs jingled, hiscuirass glittered, his sword knocked proudly against hisample limbs.  This time the clerks evinced no inclination tolaugh, such a real ear clipper did Porthos appear.The Musketeer was introduced to M. Coquenard, whose littlegray eyes sparkled with anger at seeing his cousin allblazing new.  Nevertheless, one thing afforded him inwardconsolation; it was expected by everybody that the campaignwould be a severe one.  He whispered a hope to himself thatthis beloved relative might be killed in the field.Porthos paid his compliments to M. Coquenard and bade himfarewell.  M. Coquenard wished him all sorts of

    prosperities.  As to Mme. Coquenard, she could not restrainher tears; but no evil impressions were taken from her griefas she was known to be very much attached to her relatives,about whom she was constantly having serious disputes withher husband.

    But the real adieux were made in Mme. Coquenard's chamber;they were heartrending.

    As long as the procurator's wife could follow him with hereyes, she waved her handkerchief to him, leaning so far outof the window as to lead people to believe she wished toprecipitate herself.  Porthos received all these attentionslike a man accustomed to such demonstrations, only onturning the corner of the street he lifted his hatgracefully, and waved it to her as a sign of adieu.On his part Aramis wrote a long letter.  To whom?  Nobodyknew.  Kitty, who was to set out that evening for Tours, waswaiting in the next chamber.

    Athos sipped the last bottle of his Spanish wine.In the meantime D'Artagnan was defiling with his company.Arriving at the Faubourg St. Antoine, he turned round tolook gaily at the Bastille; but as it was the Bastille alonehe looked at, he did not observe Milady, who, mounted upon alight chestnut horse, designated him with her finger to twoill-looking men who came close up to the ranks to takenotice of him.  To a look of interrogation which they made,Milady replied by a sign that it was he.  Then, certain thatthere could be no mistake in the execution of her orders,she started her horse and disappeared.

    The two men followed the company, and on leaving theaubourg St. Antoine, mounted two horses properly equipped,which a servant without livery had waiting for them.

    41  THE SEIGE OF LA ROCHELLE

    The Siege of La Rochelle was one of the great politicalevents of the reign of Louis XIII, and one of the greatmilitary enterprises of the cardinal.  It is, then,interesting and even necessary that we should say a fewwords about it, particularly as many details of this siegeare connected in too important a manner with the story wehave undertaken to relate to allow us to pass it over insilence.

    The political plans of the cardinal when he undertook thissiege were extensive.  Let us unfold them first, and thenpass on to the private plans which perhaps had not lessinfluence upon his Eminence than the others.

    Of the important cities given up by Henry IV to theHuguenots as places of safety, there only remained LaRochelle.  It became necessary, therefore, to destroy thislast bulwark of Calvinism--a dangerous leaven with which theferments of civil revolt and foreign war were constantlymingling.

    Spaniards, Englishmen, and Italian malcontents, adventurersof all nations, and soldiers of fortune of every sect,flocked at the first summons under the standard of theProtestants, and organized themselves like a vastassociation, whose branches diverged freely over all partsof Europe.

    La Rochelle, which had derived a new importance from theruin of the other Calvinist cities, was, then, the focus ofdissensions and ambition.  Moreover, its port was the lastin the kingdom of France open to the English, and by closingit against England, our eternal enemy, the cardinalcompleted the work of Joan of Arc and the Duc de Guise.Thus Bassompierre, who was at once Protestant and Catholic--Protestant by conviction and Catholic as commander of theorder of the Holy Ghost; Bassompierre, who was a German bybirth and a Frenchman at heart--in short, Bassompierre, whohad a distinguished command at the siege of La Rochelle,said, in charging at the head of several other Protestantnobles like himself, "You will see, gentlemen, that we shallbe fools enough to take La Rochelle."

    And Bassompierre was right.  The cannonade of the Isle of Represaged to him the dragonnades of the Cevennes; the takingof La Rochelle was the preface to the revocation of theEdict of Nantes.

    We have hinted that by the side of these views of theleveling and simplifying minister, which belong to history,the chronicler is forced to recognize the lesser motives ofthe amorous man and jealous rival.

    Richelieu, as everyone knows, had loved the queen.  Was thislove a simple political affair, or was it naturally one ofthose profound passions which Anne of Austria inspired inthose who approached her?  That we are not able to say; butat all events, we have seen, by the anterior developments ofthis story, that Buckingham had the advantage over him, andin two or three circumstances, particularly that of thediamond studs, had, thanks to the devotedness of the threeMusketeers and the courage and conduct of D'Artagnan,cruelly mystified him.

    It was, then, Richelieu's object, not only to get rid of anenemy of France, but to avenge himself on a rival; but thisvengeance must be grand and striking and worthy in every wayof a man who held in his hand, as his weapon for combat, theforces of a kingdom.

    Richelieu knew that in combating England he combatedBuckingham; that in triumphing over England he triumphedover Buckingham--in short, that in humiliating England inthe eyes of Europe he humiliated Buckingham in the eyes ofthe queen.

    On his side Buckingham, in pretending to maintain the honorof England, was moved by interests exactly like those of thecardinal.  Buckingham also was pursuing a private vengeance.Buckingham could not under any pretense be admitted intoFrance as an ambassador; he wished to enter it as aconqueror.

    It resulted from this that the real stake in this game,which two most powerful kingdoms played for the goodpleasure of two amorous men, was simply a kind look fromAnne of Austria.

    The first advantage had been gained by Buckingham.  Arrivingunexpectedly in sight of the Isle of Re with ninety vesselsand nearly twenty thousand men, he had surprised the Comtede Toiras, who commanded for the king in the Isle, and hehad, after a bloody conflict, effected his landing.Allow us to observe in passing that in this fight perishedthe Baron de Chantal; that the Baron de Chantal left alittle orphan girl eighteen months old, and that this littlegirl was afterward Mme. de Sevigne.

    The Comte de Toiras retired into the citadel St. Martin withhis garrison, and threw a hundred men into a little fortcalled the fort of La Pree.

    This event had hastened the resolutions of the cardinal; andtill the king and he could take the command of the siege ofLa Rochelle, which was determined, he had sent Monsieur todirect the first operations, and had ordered all the troopshe could dispose of to march toward the theater of war.  Itwas of this detachment, sent as a vanguard, that our friendD'Artagnan formed a part.

    The king, as we have said, was to follow as soon as his Bedof Justice had been held; but on rising from his Bed ofJustice on the twenty-eighth of June, he felt himselfattacked by fever.  He was, notwithstanding, anxious to setout; but his illness becoming more serious, he was forced tostop at Villeroy.

    Now, whenever the king halted, the Musketeers halted.  Itfollowed that D'Artagnan, who was as yet purely and simplyin the Guards, found himself, for the time at least,separated from his good friends--Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.This separation, which was no more than an unpleasantcircumstance, would have certainly become a cause of seriousuneasiness if he had been able to guess by what unknowndangers he was surrounded.

    He, however, arrived without accident in the campestablished before La Rochelle, of the tenth of the month ofSeptember of the year 1627.

    Everything was in the same state.  The Duke of Buckinghamand his English, masters of the Isle of Re, continued tobesiege, but without success, the citadel St. Martin and thefort of La Pree; and hostilities with La Rochelle hadcommenced, two or three days before, about a fort which theDuc d'Angouleme had caused to be constructed near the city.The Guards, under the command of M. Dessessart, took uptheir quartered at the Minimes; but, as we know, D'Artagnan,possessed with ambition to enter the Musketeers, had formedbut few friendships among his comrades, and he felt himselfisolated and given up to his own reflections.

    His reflections were not very cheerful.  From the time ofhis arrival in Paris, he had been mixed up with publicaffairs; but his own private affairs had made no greatprogress, either in love or fortune.  As to love, the onlywoman he could have loved was Mme. Bonacieux; and Mme.Bonacieux had disappeared, without his being able todiscover what had become of her.  As to fortune, he hadmade--he, humble as he was--an enemy of the cardinal; thatis to say, of a man before whom trembled the greatest men ofthe kingdom, beginning with the king.

    That man had the power to crush him, and yet he had not doneso.  For a mind so perspicuous as that of D'Artagnan, thisindulgence was a light by which he caught a glimpse of abetter future.

    Then he had made himself another enemy, less to be feared,he thought; but nevertheless, he instinctively felt, not tobe despised.  This enemy was Milady.

    In exchange for all this, he had acquired the protection andgood will of the queen; but the favor of the queen was atthe present time an additional cause of persecution, and herprotection, as it was known, protected badly--as witnessChalais and Mme. Bonacieux.

    What he had clearly gained in all this was the diamond,worth five or six thousand livres, which he wore on hisfinger; and even this diamond--supposing that D'Artagnan, inhis projects of ambition, wished to keep it, to make itsomeday a pledge for the gratitude of the queen--had not inthe meanwhile, since he could not part with it, more valuethan the gravel he trod under his feet.

    We say the gravel he trod under his feet, for D'Artagnanmade these reflections while walking solitarily along apretty little road which led from the camp to the village ofAngoutin.  Now, these reflections had led him further thanhe intended, and the day was beginning to decline when, bythe last ray of the setting sun, he thought he saw thebarrel of a musket glitter from behind a hedge.

    D'Artagnan had a quick eye and a prompt understanding.  Hecomprehended that the musket had not come there of itself,and that he who bore it had not concealed himself behind ahedge with any friendly intentions.  He determined,therefore, to direct his course as clear from it as he couldwhen, on the opposite side of the road, from behind a rock,he perceived the extremity of another musket.

    This was evidently an ambuscade.

    The young man cast a glance at the first musket and saw,with a certain degree of inquietude, that it was leveled inhis direction; but as soon as he perceived that the orificeof the barrel was motionless, he threw himself upon theground.  At the same instant the gun was fired, and he heardthe whistling of a ball pass over his head.

    No time was to be lost.  D'Artagnan sprang up with a bound,and at the same instant the ball from the other musket toreup the gravel on the very spot on the road where he hadthrown himself with his face to the ground.

    D'Artagnan was not one of those foolhardy men who seek aridiculous death in order that it may be said of them thatthey did not retreat a single step.  Besides, courage wasout of the question here; D'Artagnan had fallen into anambush.

    "If there is a third shot," said he to himself, "I am a lostman."

    He immediately, therefore, took to his heels and ran towardthe camp, with the swiftness of the young men of hiscountry, so renowned for their agility; but whatever mightbe his speed, the first who fired, having had time toreload, fired a second shot, and this time so well aimedthat it struck his hat, and carried it ten paces from him.As he, however, had no other hat, he picked up this as heran, and arrived at his quarters very pale and quite out ofbreath.  He sat down without saying a word to anybody, andbegan to reflect.

    This event might have three causes:

    The first and the most natural was that it might be anambuscade of the Rochellais, who might not be sorry to killone of his Majesty's Guards, because it would be an enemythe less, and this enemy might have a well-furnished pursein his pocket.

    D'Artagnan took his hat, examined the hole made by the ball,and shook his head.  The ball was not a musket ball--it wasan arquebus ball.  The accuracy of the aim had first givenhim the idea that a special weapon had been employed.  Thiscould not, then, be a military ambuscade, as the ball wasnot of the regular caliber.

    This might be a kind remembrance of Monsieur the Cardinal.It may be observed that at the very moment when, thanks tothe ray of the sun, he perceived the gun barrel, he wasthinking with astonishment on the forbearance of hisEminence with respect to him.

    But D'Artagnan again shook his head.  For people toward whomhe had but to put forth his hand, his Eminence had rarelyrecourse to such means.

    It might be a vengeance of Milady; that was most probable.He tried in vain to remember the faces or dress of theassassins; he had escaped so rapidly that he had not hadleisure to notice anything.

    "Ah, my poor friends!" murmured D'Artagnan; "where are you?And that you should fail me!"

    D'Artagnan passed a very bad night.  Three or four times hestarted up, imagining that a man was approaching his bed forthe purpose of stabbing him.  Nevertheless, day dawnedwithout darkness having brought any accident.

    But D'Artagnan well suspected that that which was deferredwas not relinquished.

    D'Artagnan remained all day in his quarters, assigning as areason to himself that the weather was bad.

    At nine o'clock the next morning, the drums beat to arms.The Duc d'Orleans visited the posts.  The guards were underarms, and D'Artagnan took his place in the midst of hiscomrades.

    Monsieur passed along the front of the line; then all thesuperior officers approached him to pay their compliments,M. Dessessart, captain of the Guards, as well as the others.At the expiration of a minute or two, it appeared toD'Artagnan that M. Dessessart made him a sign to approach.He waited for a fresh gesture on the part of his superior,for fear he might be mistaken; but this gesture beingrepeated, he left the ranks, and advanced to receive orders."Monsieur is about to ask for some men of good will for adangerous mission, but one which will do honor to those whoshall accomplish it; and I made you a sign in order that youmight hold yourself in readiness."

    "Thanks, my captain!" replied D'Artagnan, who wished fornothing better than an opportunity to distinguish himselfunder the eye of the lieutenant general.

    In fact the Rochellais had made a sortie during the night,and had retaken a bastion of which the royal army had gainedpossession two days before.  The matter was to ascertain, byreconnoitering, how the enemy guarded this bastion.At the end of a few minutes Monsieur raised his voice, andsaid, "I want for this mission three or four volunteers, ledby a man who can be depended upon."

    "As to the man to be depended upon, I have him under myhand, monsieur," said M. Dessessart, pointing to D'Artagnan;"and as to the four or five volunteers, Monsieur has but tomake his intentions known, and the men will not be wanting.""Four men of good will who will risk being killed with me!"said D'Artagnan, raising his sword.

    Two of his comrades of the Guards immediately sprangforward, and two other soldiers having joined them, thenumber was deemed sufficient.  D'Artagnan declined allothers, being unwilling to take the first chance from thosewho had the priority.

    It was not know whether, after the taking of the bastion,the Rochellais had evacuated it or left a garrison in it;the object then was to examine the place near enough toverify the reports.

    D'Artagnan set out with his four companions, and followedthe trench; the two Guards marched abreast with him, and thetwo soldiers followed behind.

    They arrived thus, screened by the lining of the trench,till they came within a hundred paces of the bastion.There, on turning round, D'Artagnan perceived that the twosoldiers had disappeared.

    He thought that, beginning to be afraid, they had stayedbehind, and he continued to advance.

    At the turning of the counterscarp they found themselveswithin about sixty paces of the bastion.  They saw no one,and the bastion seemed abandoned.

    The three composing our forlorn hope were deliberatingwhether they should proceed any further, when all at once acircle of smoke enveloped the giant of stone, and a dozenballs came whistling around D'Artagnan and his companions.They knew all they wished to know; the bastion was guarded.A longer stay in this dangerous spot would have been uselessimprudence.  D'Artagnan and his two companions turned theirbacks, and commenced a retreat which resembled a flight.On arriving at the angle of the trench which was to servethem as a rampart, one of the Guardsmen fell.  A ball hadpassed through his breast.  The other, who was safe andsound, continued his way toward the camp.

    D'Artagnan was not willing to abandon his companion thus,and stooped to raise him and assist him in regaining thelines; but at this moment two shots were fired.  One ballstruck the head of the already-wounded guard, and the otherflattened itself against a rock, after having passed withintwo inches of D'Artagnan.

    The young man turned quickly round, for this attack couldnot have come from the bastion, which was hidden by theangle of the trench.  The idea of the two soldiers who hadabandoned him occurred to his mind, and with them heremembered the assassins of two evenings before.  Heresolved this time to know with whom he had to deal, andfell upon the body of his comrade as if he were dead.He quickly saw two heads appear above an abandoned workwithin thirty paces of him; they were the heads of the twosoldiers.  D'Artagnan had not been deceived; these two menhad only followed for the purpose of assassinating him,hoping that the young man's death would be placed to theaccount of the enemy.

    As he might be only wounded and might denounce their crime,they came up to him with the purpose of making sure.Fortunately, deceived by D'Artagnan's trick, they neglectedto reload their guns.

    When they were within ten paces of him, D'Artagnan, who infalling had taken care not to let go his sword, sprang upclose to them.

    The assassins comprehended that if they fled toward the campwithout having killed their man, they should be accused byhim; therefore their first idea was to join the enemy.  Oneof them took his gun by the barrel, and used it as he woulda club.  He aimed a terrible blow at D'Artagnan, who avoidedit by springing to one side; but by this movement he left apassage free to the bandit, who darted off toward thebastion.  As the Rochellais who guarded the bastion wereignorant of the intentions of the man they saw coming towardthem, they fired upon him, and he fell, struck by a ballwhich broke his shoulder.

    Meantime D'Artagnan had thrown himself upon the othersoldier, attacking him with his sword.  The conflict was notlong; the wretch had nothing to defend himself with but hisdischarged arquebus.  The sword of the Guardsman slippedalong the barrel of the now-useless weapon, and passedthrough the thigh of the assassin, who fell.

    D'Artagnan immediately placed the point of his sword at histhroat.

    "Oh, do not kill me!" cried the bandit.  "Pardon, pardon, myofficer, and I will tell you all."

    "Is your secret of enough importance to me to spare yourlife for it?" asked the young man, withholding his arm."Yes; if you think existence worth anything to a man oftwenty, as you are, and who may hope for everything, beinghandsome and brave, as you are."

    "Wretch," cried D'Artagnan, "speak quickly!  Who employedyou to assassinate me?"

    "A woman whom I don't know, but who is called Milady.""But if you don't know this woman, how do you know hername?"

    "My comrade knows her, and called her so.  It was with himshe agreed, and not with me; he even has in his pocket aletter from that person, who attaches great importance toyou, as I have heard him say."

    "But how did you become concerned in this villainousaffair?"

    "He proposed to me to undertake it with him, and I agreed.""And how much did she give you for this fine enterprise?""A hundred louis."

    "Well, come!" said the young man, laughing, "she thinks I amworth something.  A hundred louis?  Well, that was atemptation for two wretches like you.  I understand why youaccepted it, and I grant you my pardon; but upon onecondition."

    "What is that?" said the soldier, uneasy at perceiving thatall was not over.

    "That you will go and fetch me the letter your comrade hasin his pocket."

    "But," cried the bandit, "that is only another way ofkilling me.  How can I go and fetch that letter under thefire of the bastion?"

    "You must nevertheless make up your mind to go and get it,or I swear you shall die by my hand."

    "Pardon, monsieur; pity!  In the name of that young lady youlove, and whom you perhaps believe dead but who is not!"cried the bandit, throwing himself upon his knees andleaning upon his hand--for he began to lose his strengthwith his blood.

    "And how do you know there is a young woman whom I love, andthat I believed that woman dead?" asked D'Artagnan."By that letter which my comrade has in his pocket.""You see, then," said D'Artagnan, "that I must have thatletter.  So no more delay, no more hesitation; or elsewhatever may be my repugnance to soiling my sword a secondtime with the blood of a wretch like you, I swear by myfaith as an honest man--" and at these words D'Artagnan madeso fierce a gesture that the wounded man sprang up."Stop, stop!" cried he, regaining strength by force ofterror.  "I will go--I will go!"

    D'Artagnan took the soldier's arquebus, made him go onbefore him, and urged him toward his companion by prickinghim behind with his sword.

    It was a frightful thing to see this wretch, leaving a longtrack of blood on the ground he passed over, pale withapproaching death, trying to drag himself along withoutbeing seen to the body of his accomplice, which lay twentypaces from him.

    Terror was so strongly painted on his face, covered with acold sweat, that D'Artagnan took pity on him, and castingupon him a look of contempt, "Stop," said he, "I will showyou the difference between a man of courage and such acoward as you.  Stay where you are; I will go myself."And with a light step, an eye on the watch, observing themovements of the enemy and taking advantage of the accidentsof the ground, D'Artagnan succeeded in reaching the secondsoldier.

    There were two means of gaining his object--to search him onthe spot, or to carry him away, making a buckler of hisbody, and search him in the trench.

    D'Artagnan preferred the second means, and lifted theassassin onto his shoulders at the moment the enemy fired.A slight shock, the dull noise of three balls whichpenetrated the flesh, a last cry, a convulsion of agony,proved to D'Artagnan that the would-be assassin had savedhis life.

    D'Artagnan regained the trench, and threw the corpse besidethe wounded man, who was as pale as death.

    Then he began to search.  A leather pocketbook, a purse, inwhich was evidently a part of the sum which the bandit hadreceived, with a dice box and dice, completed thepossessions of the dead man.

    He left the box and dice where they fell, threw the purse tothe wounded man, and eagerly opened the pocketbook.Among some unimportant papers he found the following letter,that which he had sought at the risk of his life:

    "Since you have lost sight of that woman and she is now insafety in the convent, which you should never have allowedher to reach, try, at least, not to miss the man.  If youdo, you know that my hand stretches far, and that you shallpay very dearly for the hundred louis you have from me."

    No signature.  Nevertheless it was plain the letter camefrom Milady.  He consequently kept it as a piece ofevidence, and being in safety behind the angle of thetrench, he began to interrogate the wounded man.  Heconfessed that he had undertaken with his comrade--the samewho was killed--to carry off a young woman who was to leaveParis by the Barriere de La Villette; but having stopped todrink at a cabaret, they had missed the carriage by tenminutes.

    "But what were you to do with that woman?" asked D'Artagnan,with anguish.

    "We were to have conveyed her to a hotel in the PlaceRoyale," said the wounded man.

    "Yes, yes!" murmured D'Artagnan; "that's the place--Milady'sown residence!"

    Then the young man tremblingly comprehended what a terriblethirst for vengeance urged this woman on to destroy him, aswell as all who loved him, and how well she must beacquainted with the affairs of the court, since she haddiscovered all.  There could be no doubt she owed thisinformation to the cardinal.

    But amid all this he perceived, with a feeling of real joy,that the queen must have discovered the prison in which poorMme. Bonacieux was explaining her devotion, and that she hadfreed her from that prison;  and the letter he had receivedfrom the young woman, and her passage along the road ofChaillot like an apparition, were now explained.

    Then also, as Athos had predicted, it became possible tofind Mme. Bonacieux, and a convent was not impregnable.This idea completely restored clemency to his heart.  Heturned toward the wounded man, who had watched with intenseanxiety all the various expressions of his countenance, andholding out his arm to him, said, "Come, I will not abandonyou thus.  Lean upon me, and let us return to the camp.""Yes," said the man, who could scarcely believe in suchmagnanimity, "but is it not to have me hanged?"

    "You have my word," said he; "for the second time I give youyour life."

    The wounded man sank upon his knees, to again kiss the feetof his preserver; but D'Artagnan, who had no longer a motivefor staying so near the enemy, abridged the testimonials ofhis gratitude.

    The Guardsman who had returned at the first dischargeannounced the death of his four companions.  They weretherefore much astonished and delighted in the regiment whenthey saw the young man come back safe and sound.

    D'Artagnan explained the sword wound of his companion by asortie which he improvised.  He described the death of theother soldier, and the perils they had encountered.  Thisrecital was for him the occasion of veritable triumph.  Thewhole army talked of this expedition for a day, and Monsieurpaid him his compliments upon it.  Besides this, as everygreat action bears its recompense with it, the brave exploitof D'Artagnan resulted in the restoration of the tranquilityhe had lost.  In fact, D'Artagnan believed that he might betranquil, as one of his two enemies was killed and the otherdevoted to his interests.

    This tranquillity proved one thing--that D'Artagnan did notyet know Milady.

    42  THE ANJOU WINE

    After the most disheartening news of the king's health, areport of his convalescence began to prevail in the camp;and as he was very anxious to be in person at the siege, itwas said that as soon as he could mount a horse he would setforward.

    Meantime, Monsieur, who knew that from one day to the otherhe might expect to be removed from his command by the Ducd'Angouleme, by Bassompierre, or by Schomberg, who were alleager for his post, did but little, lost his days inwavering, and did not dare to attempt any great enterpriseto drive the English from the Isle of Re, where they stillbesieged the citadel St. Martin and the fort of La Pree, ason their side the French were besieging La Rochelle.D'Artagnan, as we have said, had become more tranquil, asalways happens after a post danger, particularly when thedanger seems to have vanished.  He only felt one uneasiness,and that was at not hearing any tidings from his friends.But one morning at the commencement of the month of Novembereverything was explained to him by this letter, dated fromVilleroy:

    M. d'Artagnan, MM. Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, after havinghad an entertainment at my house and enjoying themselvesvery much, created such a disturbance that the provost ofthe castle, a rigid man, has ordered them to be confined forsome days; but I accomplish the order they have given me byforwarding to you a dozen bottles of my Anjou wine, withwhich they are much pleased.  They are desirous that youshould drink to their health in their favorite wine.  I havedone this, and am, monsieur, with great respect,

    Your very humble and obedient servant,

    Godeau, Purveyor of the Musketeers

    "That's all well!" cried D'Artagnan.  They think of me intheir pleasures, as I thought of them in my troubles.  Well,I will certainly drink to their health with all my heart,but I will not drink alone."

    And D'Artagnan went among those Guardsmen with whom he hadformed greater intimacy than with the others, to invite themto enjoy with him this present of delicious Anjou wine whichhad been sent him from Villeroy.

    One of the two Guardsmen was engaged that evening, andanother the next, so the meeting was fixed for the day afterthat.

    D'Artagnan, on his return, sent the twelve bottles of wineto the refreshment room of the Guards, with strict ordersthat great care should be taken of it; and then, on the dayappointed, as the dinner was fixed for midday D'Artagnansent Planchet at nine in the morning to assist in preparingeverything for the entertainment.

    Planchet, very proud of being raised to the dignity oflandlord, thought he would make all ready, like anintelligent man; and with this view called in the assistanceof the lackey of one of his master's guests, named Fourreau,and the false soldier who had tried to kill D'Artagnan andwho, belonging to no corps, had entered into the service ofD'Artagnan, or rather of Planchet, after D'Artagnan hadsaved his life.

    The hour of the banquet being come, the two guards arrived,took their places, and the dishes were arranged on thetable.  Planchet waited, towel on arm; Fourreau uncorked thebottles; and Brisemont, which was the name of theconvalescent, poured the wine, which was a little shaken byits journey, carefully into decanters.  Of this wine, thefirst bottle being a little thick at the bottom, Brisemontpoured the lees into a glass, and D'Artagnan desired him todrink it, for the poor devil had not yet recovered hisstrength.

    The guests having eaten the soup, were about to lift thefirst glass of wine to their lips, when all at once thecannon sounded from Fort Louis and Fort Neuf.  TheGuardsmen, imagining this to be caused by some unexpectedattack, either of the besieged or the English, sprang totheir swords.  D'Artagnan, not less forward than they, didlikewise, and all ran out, in order to repair to theirposts.

    But scarcely were they out of the room before they were madeaware of the cause of this noise.  Cries of "Live the king!Live the cardinal!" resounded on every side, and the drumswere beaten in all directions.

    In short, the king, impatient, as has been said, had come byforced marches, and had that moment arrived with all hishousehold and a reinforcement of ten thousand troops.  HisMusketeers proceeded and followed him.  D'Artagnan, placedin line with his company, saluted with an expressive gesturehis three friends, whose eyes soon discovered him, and M. deTreville, who detected him at once.

    The ceremony of reception over, the four friends were soonin one another's arms.

    "Pardieu!" cried D'Artagnan, "you could not have arrived inbetter time; the dinner cannot have had time to get cold!Can it, gentlemen?" added the young man, turning to the twoGuards, whom he introduced to his friends.

    "Ah, ah!" said Porthos, "it appears we are feasting!""I hope," said Aramis, "there are no women at your dinner.""Is there any drinkable wine in your tavern?" asked Athos."Well, pardieu! there is yours, my dear friend," repliedD'Artagnan.

    "Our wine!" said Athos, astonished.

    "Yes, that you sent me."

    "We send you wine?"

    "You know very well--the wine from the hills of Anjou.""Yes, I know what brand you are talking about."

    "The wine you prefer."

    "Well, in the absence of champagne and chambertin, you mustcontent yourselves with that."

    "And so, connoisseurs in wine as we are, we have sent yousome Anjou wine?" said Porthos.

    "Not exactly, it is the wine that was sent by your order.""On our account?" said the three Musketeers.

    "Did you send this wine, Aramis?" said Athos.

    "No; and you, Porthos?"

    "No; and you, Athos?"

    "No!"

    "If it was not you, it was your purveyor," said D'Artagnan."Our purveyor!"

    "Yes, your purveyor, Godeau--the purveyor of the

    Musketeers."

    "My faith! never mind where it comes from," said Porthos,"let us taste it, and if it is good, let us drink it.""No," said Athos; "don't let us drink wine which comes froman unknown source."

    "You are right, Athos," said D'Artagnan.  "Did none of youcharge your purveyor, Godeau, to send me some wine?""No!  And yet you say he has sent you some as from us?""Here is his letter," said D'Artagnan, and he presented thenote to his comrades.

    "This is not his writing!" said Athos.  "I am acquaintedwith it;  before we left Villeroy I settled the accounts ofthe regiment."

    "A false letter altogether," said Porthos, "we have not beendisciplined."

    "D'Artagnan," said Aramis, in a reproachful tone, "how couldyou believe that we had made a disturbance?"

    D'Artagnan grew pale, and a convulsive trembling shook allhis limbs.

    "Thou alarmest me!" said Athos, who never used thee and thoubut upon very particular occasions, "what has happened?""Look you, my friends!" cried D'Artagnan, "a horriblesuspicion crosses my mind!  Can this be another vengeance ofthat woman?"

    It was now Athos who turned pale.

    D'Artagnan rushed toward the refreshment room, the threeMusketeers and the two Guards following him.

    The first object that met the eyes of D'Artagnan on enteringthe room was Brisemont, stretched upon the ground androlling in horrible convulsions.

    Planchet and Fourreau, as pale as death, were trying to givehim succor; but it was plain that all assistance wasuseless--all the features of the dying man were distortedwith agony.

    "Ah!" cried he, on perceiving D'Artagnan, "ah! this isfrightful!  You pretend to pardon me, and you poison me!""I!" cried D'Artagnan.  "I, wretch?  What do you say?""I say that it was you who gave me the wine; I say that itwas you who desired me to drink it.  I say you wished toavenge yourself on me, and I say that it is horrible!""Do not think so, Brisemont," said D'Artagnan; "do not thinkso.  I swear to you, I protest--"

    "Oh, but God is above!  God will punish you!  My God, grantthat he may one day suffer what I suffer!"

    "Upon the Gospel," said D'Artagnan, throwing himself down bythe dying man, "I swear to you that the wine was poisonedand that I was going to drink of it as you did."

    "I do not believe you," cried the soldier, and he expiredamid horrible tortures.

    "Frightful! frightful!" murmured Athos, while Porthos brokethe bottles and Aramis gave orders, a little too late, thata confessor should be sent for."

    "Oh, my friends," said D'Artagnan, "you come once more tosave my life, not only mine but that of these gentlemen.Gentlemen," continued he, addressing the Guardsmen, "Irequest you will be silent with regard to this adventure.Great personages may have had a hand in what you have seen,and if talked about, the evil would only recoil upon us.""Ah, monsieur!" stammered Planchet, more dead than alive,"ah, monsieur, what an escape I have had!"

    "How, sirrah! you were going to drink my wine?"

    "To the health of the king, monsieur; I was going to drink asmall glass of it if Fourreau had not told me I was called.""Alas!" said Fourreau, whose teeth chattered with terror,"I wanted to get him out of the way that I might drink myself.""Gentlemen," said D'Artagnan, addressing the Guardsmen, "youmay easily comprehend that such a feast can only be verydull after what has taken place; so accept my excuses, andput off the party till another day, I beg of you."The two Guardsmen courteously accepted D'Artagnan's excuses,and perceiving that the four friends desired to be alone,retired.

    When the young Guardsman and the three Musketeers werewithout witnesses, they looked at one another with an airwhich plainly expressed that each of them perceived thegravity of their situation.

    "In the first place," said Athos, "let us leave thischamber; the dead are not agreeable company, particularlywhen they have died a violent death."

    "Planchet," said D'Artagnan, "I commit the corpse of thispoor devil to your care.  Let him be interred in holyground.  He committed a crime, it is true; but he repentedof it."

    And the four friends quit the room, leaving to Planchet andFourreau the duty of paying mortuary honors to Brisemont.The host gave them another chamber, and served them withfresh eggs and some water, which Athos went himself to drawat the fountain.  In a few words, Porthos and Aramis wereposted as to the situation.

    "Well," said D'Artagnan to Athos, "you see, my dear friend,that this is war to the death."

    Athos shook his head.

    "Yes, yes," replied he, "I perceive that plainly; but do youreally believe it is she?"

    "I am sure of it."

    "Nevertheless, I confess I still doubt."

    "But the fleur-de-lis on her shoulder?"

    "She is some Englishwoman who has committed a crime inFrance, and has been branded in consequence."

    "Athos, she is your wife, I tell you," repeated D'Artagnan;"only reflect how much the two descriptions resemble eachother."

    "Yes; but I should think the other must be dead, I hangedher so effectually."

    It was D'Artagnan who now shook his head in his turn."But in either case, what is to be done?" said the youngman.

    "The fact is, one cannot remain thus, with a sword hangingeternally over his head," said Athos.  "We must extricateourselves from this position."

    "But how?"

    "Listen!  You must try to see her, and have an explanationwith her.  Say to her: 'Peace or war!  My word as agentleman never to say anything of you, never to do anythingagainst you; on your side, a solemn oath to remain neutralwith respect to me.  If not, I will apply to the chancellor,I will apply to the king, I will apply to the hangman, Iwill move the courts against you, I will denounce you asbranded, I will bring you to trial; and if you areacquitted, well, by the faith of a gentleman, I will killyou at the corner of some wall, as I would a mad dog.'""I like the means well enough," said D'Artagnan, "but whereand how to meet with her?"

    "Time, dear friend, time brings round opportunity;opportunity is the martingale of man.  The more we haveventured the more we gain, when we know how to wait.""Yes; but to wait surrounded by assassins and poisoners.""Bah!" said Athos.  "God has preserved us hitherto, God willpreserve us still."

    "Yes, we.  Besides, we are men; and everything considered,it is our lot to risk our lives; but she," asked he, in anundertone.

    "What she?" asked Athos.

    "Constance."

    "Madame Bonacieux!  Ah, that's true!" said Athos.  "My poorfriend, I had forgotten you were in love."

    "Well, but," said Aramis, "have you not learned by theletter you found on the wretched corpse that she is in aconvent?  One may be very comfortable in a convent; and assoon as the siege of La Rochelle is terminated, I promiseyou on my part--"

    "Good," cried Athos, "good!  Yes, my dear Aramis, we allknow that your views have a religious tendency."

    "I am only temporarily a Musketeer," said Aramis, humbly."It is some time since we heard from his mistress," saidAthos, in a low voice.  "But take no notice; we know allabout that."

    "Well," said Porthos, "it appears to me that the means arevery simple."

    "What?" asked D'Artagnan.

    "You say she is in a convent?" replied Porthos.

    "Yes."

    "Very well.  As soon as the siege is over, we'll carry heroff from that convent."

    "But we must first learn what convent she is in.""That's true," said Porthos.

    "But I think I have it," said Athos.  "Don't you say, dearD'Artagnan, that it is the queen who has made choice of theconvent for her?"

    "I believe so, at least."

    "In that case Porthos will assist us."

    "And how so, if you please?"

    "Why, by your marchioness, your duchess, your princess.  Shemust have a long arm."

    "Hush!" said Porthos, placing a finger on his lips.  "Ibelieve her to be a cardinalist; she must know nothing ofthe matter."

    "Then," said Aramis, "I take upon myself to obtainintelligence of her."

    "You, Aramis?" cried the three friends.  "You!  And how?""By the queen's almoner, to whom I am very intimatelyallied," said Aramis, coloring.

    And on this assurance, the four friends, who had finishedtheir modest repast, separated, with the promise of meetingagain that evening.  D'Artagnan returned to less importantaffairs, and the three Musketeers repaired to the king'squarters, where they had to prepare their lodging.

    43  The Sign of the Red Dovecot

    Meanwhile the king, who, with more reason than the cardinal,showed his hatred for Buckingham, although scarcely arrivedwas in such a haste to meet the enemy that he commandedevery disposition to be made to drive the English from theIsle of Re, and afterward to press the siege of La Rochelle;but notwithstanding his earnest wish, he was delayed by thedissensions which broke out between MM. Bassompierre andSchomberg, against the Duc d'Angouleme.

    MM. Bassompierre and Schomberg were marshals of France, andclaimed their right of commanding the army under the ordersof the king; but the cardinal, who feared that Bassompierre,a Huguenot at heart, might press but feebly the English andRochellais, his brothers in religion, supported the Ducd'Angouleme, whom the king, at his instigation, had namedlieutenant general.  The result was that to prevent MM.Bassompierre and Schomberg from deserting the army, aseparate command had to be given to each.  Bassompierre tookup his quarters on the north of the city, between Leu andDompierre; the Duc d'angouleme on the east, from Dompierreto Perigny; and M. de Schomberg on the south, from Perignyto Angoutin.

    The quarters of Monsieur were at Dompierre; the quarters ofthe king were sometimes at Estree, sometimes at Jarrie; thecardinal's quarters were upon the downs, at the bridge of LaPierre, in a simple house without any entrenchment.  So thatMonsieur watched Bassompierre; the king, the Duc

    d'Angouleme; and the cardinal, M. de Schomberg.

    As soon as this organization was established, they set aboutdriving the English from the Isle.

    The juncture was favorable.  The English, who require, aboveeverything, good living in order to be good soldiers, onlyeating salt meat and bad biscuit, had many invalids in theircamp.  Still further, the sea, very rough at this period ofthe year all along the sea coast, destroyed every day somelittle vessel; and the shore, from the point of l'Aiguillonto the trenches, was at every tide literally covered withthe wrecks of pinnacles, roberges, and feluccas.  The resultwas that even if the king's troops remained quietly in theircamp, it was evident that some day or other, Buckingham, whoonly continued in the Isle from obstinacy, would be obligedto raise the siege.

    But as M. de Toiras gave information that everything waspreparing in the enemy's camp for a fresh assault, the kingjudged that it would be best to put an end to the affair,and gave the necessary orders for a decisive action.As it is not our intention to give a journal of the siege,but on the contrary only to describe such of the events ofit as are connected with the story we are relating, we willcontent ourselves with saying in two words that theexpedition succeeded, to the great astonishment of the kingand the great glory of the cardinal.  The English, repulsedfoot by foot, beaten in all encounters, and defeated in thepassage of the Isle of Loie, were obliged to re-embark,leaving on the field of battle two thousand men, among whomwere five colonels, three lieutenant colonels, two hundredand fifty captains, twenty gentlemen of rank, four pieces ofcannon, and sixty flags, which were taken to Paris by Claudede St. Simon, and suspended with great pomp in the arches ofNotre Dame.

    Te Deums were chanted in camp, and afterward throughoutFrance.

    The cardinal was left free to carry on the siege, withouthaving, at least at the present, anything to fear on thepart of the English.

    But it must be acknowledged, this response was butmomentary.  An envoy of the Duke of Buckingham, namedMontague, was taken, and proof was obtained of a leaguebetween the German Empire, Spain, England, and Lorraine.This league was directed against France.

    Still further, in Buckingham's lodging, which he had beenforced to abandon more precipitately than he expected,papers were found which confirmed this alliance and which,as the cardinal asserts in his memoirs, strongly compromisedMme. de Chevreuse and consequently the queen.

    It was upon the cardinal that all the responsibility fell,for one is not a despotic minister without responsibility.All, therefore, of the vast resources of his genius were atwork night and day, engaged in listening to the least reportheard in any of the great kingdoms of Europe.

    The cardinal was acquainted with the activity, and moreparticularly the hatred, of Buckingham.  If the league whichthreatened France triumphed, all his influence would belost.  Spanish policy and Austrian policy would have theirrepresentatives in the cabinet of the Louvre, where they hadas yet but partisans; and he, Richelieu--the Frenchminister, the national minister--would be ruined.  The king,even while obeying him like a child, hated him as a childhates his master, and would abandon him to the personalvengeance of Monsieur and the queen.  He would then be lost,and France, perhaps, with him.  All this must be preparedagainst.

    Courtiers, becoming every instant more numerous, succeededone another, day and night, in the little house of thebridge of La Pierre, in which the cardinal had establishedhis residence.

    There were monks who wore the frock with such an ill gracethat it was easy to perceive they belonged to the churchmilitant; women a little inconvenienced by their costume aspages and whose large trousers could not entirely concealtheir rounded forms; and peasants with blackened hands butwith fine limbs, savoring of the man of quality a leagueoff.

    There were also less agreeable visits--for two or threetimes reports were spread that the cardinal had nearly beenassassinated.

    It is true that the enemies of the cardinal said that it washe himself who set these bungling assassins to work, inorder to have, if wanted, the right of using reprisals; butwe must not believe everything ministers say, nor everythingtheir enemies say.

    These attempts did not prevent the cardinal, to whom hismost inveterate detractors have never denied personalbravery, from making nocturnal excursions, sometimes tocommunicate to the Duc d'Angouleme important orders,sometimes to confer with the king, and sometimes to have aninterview with a messenger whom he did not wish to see athome.

    On their part the Musketeers, who had not much to do withthe siege, were not under very strict orders and led ajoyous life.  The was the more easy for our three companionsin particular; for being friends of M. de Treville, theyobtained from him special permission to be absent after theclosing of the camp.

    Now, one evening when D'Artagnan, who was in the trenches,was not able to accompany them, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis,mounted on their battle steeds, enveloped in their warcloaks, with their hands upon their pistol butts, werereturning from a drinking place called the Red Dovecot,which Athos had discovered two days before upon the route toJarrie, following the road which led to the camp and quiteon their guard, as we have stated, for fear of an ambuscade,when, about a quarter of a league from the village ofBoisnau, they fancied they heard the sound of horsesapproaching them.  They immediately all three halted, closedin, and waited, occupying the middle of the road.  In aninstant, and as the moon broke from behind a cloud, they sawat a turning of the road two horsemen who, on perceivingthem, stopped in their turn, appearing to deliberate whetherthey should continue their route or go back.  The hesitationcreated some suspicion in the three friends, and Athos,advancing a few paces in front of the others, cried in afirm voice, "Who goes there?"

    "Who goes there, yourselves?" replied one of the horsemen."That is not an answer," replied Athos.  "Who goes there?Answer, or we charge."

    "Beware of what you are about, gentlemen!" said a clearvoice which seemed accustomed to command.

    "It is some superior officer making his night rounds," saidAthos.  "What do you wish, gentlemen?"

    "Who are you?" said the same voice, in the same commandingtone. "Answer in your turn, or you may repent of yourdisobedience."

    "King's Musketeers," said Athos, more and more convincedthat he who interrogated them had the right to do so."What company?"

    "Company of Treville."

    "Advance, and give an account of what you are doing here atthis hour."

    The three companions advanced rather humbly--for all werenow convinced that they had to do with someone more powerfulthan themselves--leaving Athos the post of speaker.One of the two riders, he who had spoken second, was tenpaces in front of his companion.  Athos made a sign toPorthos and Aramis also to remain in the rear, and advancedalone.

    "Your pardon, my officer," said Athos; "but we were ignorantwith whom we had to do, and you may see that we were goodguard."

    "Your name?" said the officer, who covered a part of hisface with his cloak.

    "But yourself, monsieur," said Athos, who began to beannoyed by this inquisition, "give me, I beg you, the proofthat you have the right to question me."

    "Your name?" repeated the cavalier a second time, lettinghis cloak fall, and leaving his face uncovered.

    "Monsieur the Cardinal!" cried the stupefied Musketeer."Your name?" cried his Eminence, for the third time."Athos," said the Musketeer.

    The cardinal made a sign to his attendant, who drew near."These three Musketeers shall follow us," said he, in anundertone.  "I am not willing it should be known I have leftthe camp; and if they follow us we shall be certain theywill tell nobody."

    "We are gentlemen, monseigneur," said Athos; "require ourparole, and give yourself no uneasiness.  Thank God, we cankeep a secret."

    The cardinal fixed his piercing eyes on this courageousspeaker.

    "You have a quick ear, Monsieur Athos," said the cardinal;"but now listen to this.  It is not from mistrust that Irequest you to follow me, but for my security.  Yourcompanions are no doubt Messieurs Porthos and Aramis.""Yes, your Eminence," said Athos, while the two Musketeerswho had remained behind advanced hat in hand.

    "I know you, gentlemen," said the cardinal, "I know you.  Iknow you are not quite my friends, and I am sorry you arenot so; but I know you are brave and loyal gentlemen, andthat confidence may be placed in you.  Monsieur Athos, dome, then, the honor to accompany me; you and your twofriends, and then I shall have an escort to excite envy inhis Majesty, if we should meet him."

    The three Musketeers bowed to the necks of their horses."Well, upon my honor," said Athos, "your Eminence is rightin taking us with you; we have seen several ill-lookingfaces on the road, and we have even had a quarrel at the RedDovecot with four of those faces."

    "A quarrel, and what for, gentlemen?" said the cardinal;"you know I don't like quarrelers."

    "And that is the reason why I have the honor to inform yourEminence of what has happened; for you might learn it fromothers, and upon a false account believe us to be in fault.""What have been the results of your quarrel?" said thecardinal, knitting his brow.

    "My friend, Aramis, here, has received a slight sword woundin the arm, but not enough to prevent him, as your Eminencemay see, from mounting to the assault tomorrow, if yourEminence orders an escalade."

    "But you are not the men to allow sword wounds to beinflicted upon you thus," said the cardinal.  "Come, befrank, gentlemen, you have settled accounts with somebody!Confess; you know I have the right of giving absolution.""I, monseigneur?" said Athos.  "I did not even draw mysword, but I took him who offended me round the body, andthrew him out of the window.  It appears that in falling,"continued Athos, with some hesitation, "he broke his thigh.""Ah, ah!" said the cardinal; "and you, Monsieur Porthos?""I, monseigneur, knowing that dueling is prohibited--Iseized a bench, and gave one of those brigands such a blowthat I believe his shoulder is broken."

    "Very well," said the cardinal; "and you, Monsieur Aramis?""Monseigneur, being of a very mild disposition, and being,likewise, of which Monseigneur perhaps is not aware, aboutto enter into orders, I endeavored to appease my comrades,when one of these wretches gave me a wound with a sword,treacherously, across my left arm.  Then I admit my patiencefailed me; I drew my sword in my turn, and as he came backto the charge, I fancied I felt that in throwing himselfupon me, he let it pass through his body.  I only know for acertainty that he fell; and it seemed to me that he wasborne away with his two companions."

    "The devil, gentlemen!" said the cardinal, "three men placedhors de combat in a cabaret squabble!  You don't do yourwork by halves.  And pray what was this quarrel about?""These fellows were drunk," said Athos.  "and knowing therewas a lady who had arrived at the cabaret this evening, theywanted to force her door."

    "Force her door!" said the cardinal, "and for what purpose?""To do her violence, without doubt," said Athos.  "I havehad the honor of informing your Eminence that these men weredrunk."

    "And was this lady young and handsome?" asked the cardinal,with a certain degree of anxiety.

    "We did not see her, monseigneur," said Athos.

    "You did not see her?  Ah, very well," replied the cardinal,quickly.  "You did well to defend the honor of a woman; andas I am going to the Red Dovecot myself, I shall know if youhave told me the truth."

    "Monseigneur," said Athos, haughtily, "we are gentlemen, andto save our heads we would not be guilty of a falsehood.""Therefore I do not doubt what you say, Monsieur Athos, I donot doubt it for a single instant; but," added he, "tochange the conversation, was this lady alone?"

    "The lady had a cavalier shut up with her," said Athos, "butas notwithstanding the noise, this cavalier did not showhimself, it is to be presumed that he is a coward.""Judge not rashly, says the Gospel," replied the cardinal.Athos bowed.

    "And now, gentlemen, that's well," continued the cardinal."I know what I wish to know; follow me."

    The three Musketeers passed behind his Eminence, who againenveloped his face in his cloak, and put his horse inmotion, keeping from eight to ten paces in advance of hisfour companions.

    They soon arrived at the silent, solitary inn.  No doubt thehost knew what illustrious visitor was expected, and hadconsequently sent intruders out of the way.

    Ten paces from the door the cardinal made a sign to hisesquire and the three Musketeers to halt.  A saddled horsewas fastened to the window shutter.  The cardinal knockedthree times, and in a peculiar manner.

    A man, enveloped in a cloak, came out immediately, andexchanged some rapid words with the cardinal; after which hemounted his horse, and set off in the direction of Surgeres,which was likewise the way to Paris.

    "Advance, gentlemen," said the cardinal.

    "You have told me the truth, my gentlemen," said he,addressing the Musketeers, "and it will not be my fault ifour encounter this evening be not advantageous to you.  Inthe meantime, follow me."

    The cardinal alighted; the three Musketeers did likewise.The cardinal threw the bridle of his horse to his esquire;the three Musketeers fastened the horses to the shutters.The host stood at the door.  For him, the cardinal was onlyan officer coming to visit a lady.

    "Have you any chamber on the ground floor where thesegentlemen can wait near a good fire?" said the cardinal.The host opened the door of a large room, in which an oldstove had just been replaced by a large and excellentchimney.

    "I have this," said he.

    "That will do," replied the cardinal.  "Enter, gentlemen,and be kind enough to wait for me; I shall not be more thanhalf an hour."

    And while the three Musketeers entered the ground floorroom, the cardinal, without asking further information,ascended the staircase like a man who has no need of havinghis road pointed out to him.

    44  THE UTILITY OF STOVEPIPES

    It was evident that without suspecting it, and actuatedsolely by their chivalrous and adventurous character, ourthree friends had just rendered a service to someone thecardinal honored with his special protection.

    Now, who was that someone?  That was the question the threeMusketeers put to one another.  Then, seeing that none oftheir replies could throw any light on the subject, Porthoscalled the host and asked for dice.

    Porthos and Aramis placed themselves at the table and beganto play.  Athos walked about in a contemplative mood.While thinking and walking, Athos passed and repassed beforethe pipe of the stove, broken in halves, the other extremitypassing into the chamber above; and every time he passed andrepassed he heard a murmur of words, which at length fixedhis attention.  Athos went close to it, and distinguishedsome words that appeared to merit so great an interest thathe made a sign to his friends to be silent, remaininghimself bent with his ear directed to the opening of thelower orifice.

    "Listen, Milady," said the cardinal, "the affair isimportant.  Sit down, and let us talk it over."

    "Milady!" murmured Athos.

    "I listen to your Eminence with greatest attention," replieda female voice which made the Musketeer start.

    "A small vessel with an English crew, whose captain is on myside, awaits you at the mouth of Charente, at fort of thePoint.  He will set sail tomorrow morning."

    "I must go thither tonight?"

    "Instantly!  That is to say, when you have received myinstructions.  Two men, whom you will find at the door ongoing out, will serve you as escort.  You will allow me toleave first; then, after half an hour, you can go away inyour turn."

    "Yes, monseigneur.  Now let us return to the mission withwhich you wish to charge me; and as I desire to continue tomerit the confidence of your Eminence, deign to unfold it tome in terms clear and precise, that I may not commit anerror."

    There was an instant of profound silence between the twointerlocutors.  It was evident that the cardinal wasweighing beforehand the terms in which he was about tospeak, and that Milady was collecting all her intellectualfaculties to comprehend the things he was about to say, andto engrave them in her memory when they should be spoken.Athos took advantage of this moment to tell his twocompanions to fasten the door inside, and to make them asign to come and listen with him.

    The two Musketeers, who loved their ease, brought a chairfor each of themselves and one for Athos.  All three thensat down with their heads together and their ears on thealert.

    "You will go to London," continued the cardinal.  "Arrivedin London, you will seek Buckingham."

    "I must beg your Eminence to observe," said Milady, "thatsince the affair of the diamond studs, about which the dukealways suspected me, his Grace distrusts me."

    "Well, this time," said the cardinal, "it is not necessaryto steal his confidence, but to present yourself frankly andloyally as a negotiator."

    "Frankly and loyally," repeated Milady, with an unspeakableexpression of duplicity.

    "Yes, frankly and loyally," replied the cardinal, in thesame tone.  "All this negotiation must be carried onopenly."

    "I will follow your Eminence's instructions to the letter.I only wait till you give them."

    "You will go to Buckingham in my behalf, and you will tellhim I am acquainted with all the preparations he has made;but that they give me no uneasiness, since at the first stephe takes I will ruin the queen."

    "Will he believe that your Eminence is in a position toaccomplish the threat thus made?"

    "Yes; for I have the proofs."

    "I must be able to present these proofs for his

    appreciation."

    "Without doubt.  And you will tell him I will publish thereport of Bois-Robert and the Marquis de Beautru, upon theinterview which the duke had at the residence of Madame theConstable with the queen on the evening Madame the Constablegave a masquerade.  You will tell him, in order that he maynot doubt, that he came there in the costume of the GreatMogul, which the Chevalier de Guise was to have worn, andthat he purchased this exchange for the sum of threethousand pistoles."

    "Well, monseigneur?"

    "All the details of his coming into and going out of thepalace--on the night when he introduced himself in thecharacter of an Italian fortune teller--you will tell him,that he may not doubt the correctness of my information;that he had under his cloak a large white robe dotted withblack tears, death's heads, and crossbones--for in case of asurprise, he was to pass for the phantom of the White Ladywho, as all the world knows, appears at the Louvre everytime any great event is impending."

    "Is that all, monseigneur?"

    "Tell him also that I am acquainted with all the details ofthe adventure at Amiens;  that I will have a little romancemade of it, wittily turned, with a plan of the garden andportraits of the principal actors in that nocturnalromance."

    "I will tell him that."

    "Tell him further that I hold Montague in my power; thatMontague is in the Bastille; that no letters were found uponhim, it is true, but that torture may make him tell much ofwhat he knows, and even what he does not know."

    "Exactly."

    "Then add that his Grace has, in the precipitation withwhich he quit the Isle of Re, forgotten and left behind himin his lodging a certain letter from Madame de Chevreusewhich singularly compromises the queen, inasmuch as itproves not only that her Majesty can love the enemies of theking but that she can conspire with the enemies of France.You recollect perfectly all I have told you, do you not?""Your Eminence will judge: the ball of Madame the Constable;the night at the Louvre; the evening at Amiens; the arrestof Montague; the letter of Madame de Chevreuse."

    "That's it," said the cardinal, "that's it.  You have anexcellent memory, Milady."

    "But," resumed she to whom the cardinal addressed thisflattering compliment, "if, in spite of all these reasons,the duke does not give way and continues to menace France?""The duke is in love to madness, or rather to folly,"replied Richelieu, with great bitterness.  "Like the ancientpaladins, he has only undertaken this war to obtain a lookfrom his lady love.  If he becomes certain that this warwill cost the honor, and perhaps the liberty, of the lady ofhis thoughts, as he says, I will answer for it he will looktwice."

    "And yet," said Milady, with a persistence that proved shewished to see clearly to the end of the mission with whichshe was about to be charged, "if he persists?"

    "If he persists?" said the cardinal.  "That is notprobable."

    "It is possible," said Milady.

    "If he persists--" His Eminence made a pause, and resumed:"If he persists--well, then I shall hope for one of thoseevents which change the destinies of states."

    "If your Eminence would quote to me some one of these eventsin history," said Milady, "perhaps I should partake of yourconfidence as to the future."

    "Well, here, for example," said Richelieu: "when, in 1610,for a cause similar to that which moves the duke, King HenryIV, of glorious memory, was about, at the same time, toinvade Flanders and Italy, in order to attack Austria onboth sides.  Well, did there not happen an event which savedAustria?  Why should not the king of France have the samechance as the emperor?"

    "Your Eminence means, I presume, the knife stab in the Ruede la Feronnerie?"

    "Precisely," said the cardinal.

    "Does not your Eminence fear that the punishment inflictedupon Ravaillac may deter anyone who might entertain the ideaof imitating him?"

    "There will be, in all times and in all countries,particularly if religious divisions exist in thosecountries, fanatics who ask nothing better than to becomemartyrs.  Ay, and observe--it just occurs to me that thePuritans are furious against Buckingham, and their preachersdesignate him as the Antichrist."

    "Well?" said Milady.

    "Well," continued the cardinal, in an indifferent tone, "theonly thing to be sought for at this moment is some woman,handsome, young, and clever, who has cause of quarrel withthe duke.  The duke has had many affairs of gallantry; andif he has fostered his amours by promises of eternalconstancy, he must likewise have sown the seeds of hatred byhis eternal infidelities."

    "No doubt," said Milady, coolly, "such a woman may befound."

    "Well, such a woman, who would place the knife of JacquesClement or of Ravaillac in the hands of a fanatic, wouldsave France."

    "Yes; but she would then be the accomplice of an

    assassination."

    "Were the accomplices of Ravaillac or of Jacques Clementever known?"

    "No; for perhaps they were too high-placed for anyone todare look for them where they were.  The Palace of Justicewould not be burned down for everybody, monseigneur.""You think, then, that the fire at the Palace of Justice wasnot caused by chance?" asked Richelieu, in the tone withwhich he would have put a question of no importance."I, monseigneur?" replied Milady.  "I think nothing; I quotea fact, that is all.  Only I say that if I were named Madamede Montpensier, or the Queen Marie de Medicis, I should useless precautions than I take, being simply called MiladyClarik."

    "That is just," said Richelieu.  "What do you require,then?"

    "I require an order which would ratify beforehand all that Ishould think proper to do for the greatest good of France.""But in the first place, this woman I have described must befound who is desirous of avenging herself upon the duke.""She is found," said Milady.

    "Then the miserable fanatic must be found who will serve asan instrument of God's justice."

    "He will be found."

    "Well," said the cardinal, "then it will be time to claimthe order which you just now required."

    "Your Eminence is right," replied Milady; "and I have beenwrong in seeing in the mission with which you honor meanything but that which it really is--that is, to announceto his Grace, on the part of your Eminence, that you areacquainted with the different disguises by means of which hesucceeded in approaching the queen during the fete given byMadame the Constable; that you have proofs of the interviewgranted at the Louvre by the queen to a certain Italianastrologer who was no other than the Duke of Buckingham;that you have ordered a little romance of a satirical natureto be written upon the adventures of Amiens, with a plan ofthe gardens in which those adventures took place, andportraits of the actors who figured in them; that Montagueis in the Bastille, and that the torture may make him saythings he remembers, and even things he has forgotten; thatyou possess a certain letter from Madame de Chevreuse, foundin his Grace's lodging, which singularly compromises notonly her who wrote it, but her in whose name it was written.Then, if he persists, notwithstanding all this--as that is,as I have said, the limit of my mission--I shall havenothing to do but to pray God to work a miracle for thesalvation of France.  That is it, is it not, monseigneur,and I shall have nothing else to do?"

    "That is it," replied the cardinal, dryly.

    "And now," said Milady, without appearing to remark thechange of the duke's tone toward her--"now that I havereceived the instructions of your Eminence as concerns yourenemies, Monseigneur will permit me to say a few words tohim of mine?"

    "Have you enemies, then?" asked Richelieu.

    "Yes, monseigneur, enemies against whom you owe me all yoursupport, for I made them by serving your Eminence.""Who are they?" replied the duke.

    "In the first place, there is a little intrigante namedBonacieux."

    "She is in the prison of Nantes."

    "That is to say, she was there," replied Milady; "but thequeen has obtained an order from the king by means of whichshe has been conveyed to a convent."

    "To a convent?" said the duke.

    "Yes, to a convent."

    "And to which?"

    "I don't know; the secret has been well kept."

    "But I will know!"

    "And your Eminence will tell me in what convent that womanis?"

    "I can see nothing inconvenient in that," said the cardinal."Well, now I have an enemy much more to be dreaded by methan this little Madame Bonacieux."

    "Who is that?"

    "Her lover."

    "What is his name?"

    "Oh, your Eminence knows him well," cried Milady, carriedaway by her anger.  "He is the evil genius of both of us.It is he who in an encounter with your Eminence's Guardsdecided the victory in favor of the king's Musketeers; it ishe who gave three desperate wounds to De Wardes, youremissary, and who caused the affair of the diamond studs tofail; it is he who, knowing it was I who had MadameBonacieux carried off, has sworn my death."

    "Ah, ah!" said the cardinal, "I know of whom you speak.""I mean that miserable D'Artagnan."

    "He is a bold fellow," said the cardinal.

    "And it is exactly because he is a bold fellow that he isthe more to be feared."

    "I must have," said the duke, "a proof of his connectionwith Buckingham."

    "A proof?" cried Milady; "I will have ten."

    "Well, then, it becomes the simplest thing in the world; getme that proof, and I will send him to the Bastille.""So far good, monseigneur; but afterwards?"

    "When once in the Bastille, there is no afterward!" said thecardinal, in a low voice.  "Ah, pardieu!" continued he, "ifit were as easy for me to get rid of my enemy as it is easyto get rid of yours, and if it were against such people yourequire impunity--"

    "Monseigneur," replied Milady, "a fair exchange.  Life forlife, man for man; give me one, I will give you the other.""I don't know what you mean, nor do I even desire to knowwhat you mean," replied the cardinal; "but I wish to pleaseyou, and see nothing out of the way in giving you what youdemand with respect to so infamous a creature--the more soas you tell me this D'Artagnan is a libertine, a duelist,and a traitor."

    "An infamous scoundrel, monseigneur, a scoundrel!""Give me paper, a quill, and some ink, then," said thecardinal.

    "Here they are, monseigneur."

    There was a moment of silence, which proved that thecardinal was employed in seeking the terms in which heshould write the note, or else in writing it.  Athos, whohad not lost a word of the conversation, took his twocompanions by the hand, and led them to the other end of theroom.

    "Well," said Porthos, "what do you want, and why do you notlet us listen to the end of the conversation?"

    "Hush!" said Athos, speaking in a low voice.  "We have heardall it was necessary we should hear; besides, I don'tprevent you from listening, but I must be gone."

    "You must be gone!" said Porthos; "and if the cardinal asksfor you, what answer can we make?"

    "You will not wait till he asks; you will speak first, andtell him that I am gone on the lookout, because certainexpressions of our host have given me reason to think theroad is not safe.  I will say two words about it to thecardinal's esquire likewise.  The rest concerns myself;don't be uneasy about that."

    "Be prudent, Athos," said Aramis.

    "Be easy on that head," replied Athos; "you know I am coolenough."

    Porthos and Aramis resumed their places by the stovepipe.As to Athos, he went out without any mystery, took hishorse, which was tied with those of his friends to thefastenings of the shutters, in four words convinced theattendant of the necessity of a vanguard for their return,carefully examined the priming of his pistols, drew hissword, and took, like a forlorn hope, the road to the camp.

    45  A CONJUGAL SCENE

    As Athos had foreseen, it was not long before the cardinalcame down.  He opened the door of the room in which theMusketeers were, and found Porthos playing an earnest gameof dice with Aramis.  He cast a rapid glance around theroom, and perceived that one of his men was missing."What has become of Monseigneur Athos?" asked he."Monseigneur," replied Porthos, "he has gone as a scout, onaccount of some words of our host, which made him believethe road was not safe."

    "And you, what have you done, Monsieur Porthos?"

    "I have won five pistoles of Aramis."

    "Well; now will you return with me?"

    "We are at your Eminence's orders."

    "To horse, then, gentlemen; for it is getting late."The attendant was at the door, holding the cardinal's horseby the bridle.  At a short distance a group of two men andthree horses appeared in the shade.  These were the two menwho were to conduct Milady to the fort of the Point, andsuperintend her embarkation.

    The attendant confirmed to the cardinal what the twoMusketeers had already said with respect to Athos.  Thecardinal made an approving gesture, and retraced his routewith the same precautions he had used incoming.

    Let us leave him to follow the road to the camp protected byhis esquire and the two Musketeers, and return to Athos.For a hundred paces he maintained the speed at which hestarted; but when out of sight he turned his horse to theright, made a circuit, and came back within twenty paces ofa high hedge to watch the passage of the little troop.Having recognized the laced hats of his companions and thegolden fringe of the cardinal's cloak, he waited till thehorsemen had turned the angle of the road, and having lostsight of them, he returned at a gallop to the inn, which wasopened to him without hesitation.

    The host recognized him.

    "My officer," said Athos, "has forgotten to give a piece ofvery important information to the lady, and has sent me backto repair his forgetfulness."

    "Go up," said the host; "she is still in her chamber."Athos availed himself of the permission, ascended the stairswith his lightest step, gained the landing, and through theopen door perceived Milady putting on her hat.

    He entered the chamber and closed the door behind him.  Atthe noise he made in pushing the bolt, Milady turned round.Athos was standing before the door, enveloped in his cloak,with his hat pulled down over his eyes.  On seeing thisfigure, mute and immovable as a statue, Milady wasfrightened.

    "Who are you, and what do you want?" cried she.

    "Humph," murmured Athos, "it is certainly she!"

    And letting fall his cloak and raising his hat, he advancedtoward Milady.

    "Do you know me, madame?" said he.

    Milady made one step forward, and then drew back as if shehad seen a serpent.

    "So far, well," said Athos, "I perceive you know me.""The Comte de la Fere!" murmured Milady, becomingexceedingly pale, and drawing back till the wall preventedher from going any farther.

    "Yes, Milady," replied Athos; "the Comte de la Fere inperson, who comes expressly from the other world to have thepleasure of paying you a visit.  Sit down, madame, and letus talk, as the cardinal said."

    Milady, under the influence of inexpressible terror, satdown without uttering a word.

    "You certainly are a demon sent upon the earth!" said Athos."Your power is great, I know; but you also know that withthe help of God men have often conquered the most terribledemons.  You have once before thrown yourself in my path.  Ithought I had crushed you, madame; but either I was deceivedor hell has resuscitated you!"

    Milady at these words, which recalled frightful

    remembrances, hung down her head with a suppressed groan."Yes, hell has resuscitated you," continued Athos.  "Hellhas made you rich, hell has given you another name, hell hasalmost made you another face; but it has neither effaced thestains from your soul nor the brand from your body."Milady arose as if moved by a powerful spring, and her eyesflashed lightning.  Athos remained sitting.

    "You believed me to be dead, did you not, as I believed youto be?  And the name of Athos as well concealed the Comte dela Fere, as the name Milady Clarik concealed Anne de Breuil.Was it not so you were called when your honored brothermarried us?  Our position is truly a strange one," continuedAthos, laughing.  "We have only lived up to the present timebecause we believed each other dead, and because aremembrance is less oppressive than a living creature,though a remembrance is sometimes devouring."

    "But," said Milady, in a hollow, faint voice, "what bringsyou back to me, and what do you want with me?"

    "I wish to tell you that though remaining invisible to youreyes, I have not lost sight of you."

    "You know what I have done?"

    "I can relate to you, day by day, your actions from yourentrance to the service of the cardinal to this evening."A smile of incredulity passed over the pale lips of Milady."Listen!  It was you who cut off the two diamond studs fromthe shoulder of the Duke of Buckingham; it was you had theMadame Bonacieux carried off; it was you who, in love withDe Wardes and thinking to pass the night with him, openedthe door to Monsieur d'Artagnan; it was you who, believingthat De Wardes had deceived you, wished to have him killedby his rival; it was you who, when this rival had discoveredyour infamous secret, wished to have him killed in his turnby two assassins, whom you sent in pursuit of him; it wasyou who, finding the balls had missed their mark, sentpoisoned wine with a forged letter, to make your victimbelieve that the wine came from his friends.  In short, itwas you who have but now in this chamber, seated in thischair I now fill, made an engagement with Cardinal Richelieuto cause the Duke of Buckingham to be assassinated, inexchange for the promise he has made you to allow you toassassinate D'Artagnan."

    Milady was livid.

    "You must be Satan!" cried she.

    "Perhaps," said Athos; "But at all events listen well tothis.  Assassinate the Duke of Buckingham, or cause him tobe assassinated--I care very little about that!  I don'tknow him.  Besides, he is an Englishman.  But do not touchwith the tip of your finger a single hair of D'Artagnan, whois a faithful friend whom I love and defend, or I swear toyou by the head of my father the crime which you shall haveendeavored to commit, or shall have committed, shall be thelast."

    "Monsieur d'Artagnan has cruelly insulted me," said Milady,in a hollow tone; "Monsieur d'Artagnan shall die!""Indeed!  Is it possible to insult you, madame?" said Athos,laughing; "he has insulted you, and he shall die!""He shall die!" replied Milady; "she first, and heafterward."

    Athos was seized with a kind of vertigo.  The sight of thiscreature, who had nothing of the woman about her, recalledawful remembrances.  He thought how one day, in a lessdangerous situation than the one in which he was now placed,he had already endeavored to sacrifice her to his honor.His desire for blood returned, burning his brain andpervading his frame like a raging fever; he arose in histurn, reached his hand to his belt, drew forth a pistol, andcocked it.

    Milady, pale as a corpse, endeavored to cry out; but herswollen tongue could utter no more than a hoarse sound whichhad nothing human in it and resembled the rattle of a wildbeast.  Motionless against the dark tapestry, with her hairin disorder, she appeared like a horrid image of terror.Athos slowly raised his pistol, stretched out his arm sothat the weapon almost touched Milady's forehead, and then,in a voice the more terrible from having the supremecalmness of a fixed resolution, "Madame," said he, "you willthis instant deliver to me the paper the cardinal signed; orupon my soul, I will blow your brains out."

    With another man, Milady might have preserved some doubt;but she knew Athos.  Nevertheless, she remained motionless."You have one second to decide," said he.

    Milady saw by the contraction of his countenance that thetrigger was about to be pulled; she reached her hand quicklyto her bosom, drew out a paper, and held it toward Athos."Take it," said she, "and be accursed!"

    Athos took the paper, returned the pistol to his belt,approached the lamp to be assured that it was the paper,unfolded it, and read:

    Dec. 3, 1627

    It is by more order and for the good of the state that thebearer of this has done what he has done.

    Richelieu

    "And now," said Athos, resuming his cloak and putting on hishat, "now that I have drawn your teeth, viper, bite if youcan."

    And he left the chamber without once looking behind him.At the door he found the two men and the spare horse whichthey held.

    "Gentlemen," said he, "Monseigneur's order is, you know, toconduct that woman, without losing time, to the fort of thePoint, and never to leave her till she is on board."As these words agreed wholly with the order they hadreceived, they bowed their heads in sign of assent.With regard to Athos, he leaped lightly into the saddle andset out at full gallop; only instead of following the road,he went across the fields, urging his horse to the utmostand stopping occasionally to listen.

    In one of those halts he heard the steps of several horseson the road.  He had no doubt it was the cardinal and hisescort.  He immediately made a new point in advance, rubbedhis horse down with some heath and leaves of trees, andplaced himself across the road, about two hundred paces fromthe camp.

    "Who goes there?" cried he, as soon as he perceived thehorsemen.

    "That is our brave Musketeer, I think," said the cardinal."Yes, monseigneur," said Porthos, "it is he."

    "Monsieur Athos," said Richelieu, "receive my thanks for thegood guard you have kept.  Gentlemen, we are arrived; takethe gate on the left.  The watchword is, 'King and Re.'"Saying these words, the cardinal saluted the three friendswith an inclination of his head, and took the right hand,followed by his attendant--for that night he himself sleptin the camp.

    "Well!" said Porthos and Aramis together, as soon as thecardinal was out of hearing, "well, he signed the paper sherequired!"

    "I know it," said Athos, coolly, "since here it is."And the three friends did not exchange another word tillthey reached their quarters, except to give the watchword tothe sentinels.  Only they sent Mousqueton to tell Planchetthat his master was requested, the instant that he left thetrenches, to come to the quarters of the Musketeers.Milady, as Athos had foreseen, on finding the two men thatawaited her, made no difficulty in following them.  She hadhad for an instant an inclination to be reconducted to thecardinal, and relate everything to him; but a revelation onher part would bring about a revelation on the part ofAthos.  She might say that Athos had hanged her; but thenAthos would tell that she was branded.  She thought it wasbest to preserve silence, to discreetly set off toaccomplish her difficult mission with her usual skill; andthen, all things being accomplished to the satisfaction ofthe cardinal, to come to him and claim her vengeance.In consequence, after having traveled all night, at seveno'clock she was at the fort of the Point; at eight o'clockshe had embarked; and at nine, the vessel, which withletters of marque from the cardinal was supposed to besailing for Bayonne, raised anchor, and steered its coursetoward England.

    46  THE BASTION SAINT-GERVAIS

    On arriving at the lodgings of his three friends, D'Artagnanfound them assembled in the same chamber.  Athos wasmeditating; Porthos was twisting his mustache; Aramis wassaying his prayers in a charming little Book of Hours, boundin blue velvet.

    "Pardieu, gentlemen," said he.  "I hope what you have totell me is worth the trouble, or else, I warn you, I willnot pardon you for making me come here instead of getting alittle rest after a night spent in taking and dismantling abastion.  Ah, why were you not there, gentlemen?  It waswarm work."

    "We were in a place where it was not very cold," repliedPorthos, giving his mustache a twist which was peculiar tohim.

    "Hush!" said Athos.

    "Oh, oh!" said D'Artagnan, comprehending the slight frown ofthe Musketeer.  "It appears there is something freshaboard."

    "Aramis," said Athos, "you went to breakfast the day beforeyesterday at the inn of the Parpaillot, I believe?""Yes."

    "How did you fare?"

    "For my part, I ate but little.  The day before yesterdaywas a fish day, and they had nothing but meat."

    "What," said Athos, "no fish at a seaport?"

    "They say," said Aramis, resuming his pious reading, "thatthe dyke which the cardinal is making drives them all outinto the open sea."

    "But that is not quite what I mean to ask you, Aramis,"replied Athos.  "I want to know if you were left alone, andnobody interrupted

    you."

    "Why, I think there were not many intruders.  Yes, Athos, Iknow what you mean: we shall do very well at the

    Parpaillot."

    "Let us go to the Parpaillot, then, for here the walls arelike sheets of paper."

    D'Artagnan, who was accustomed to his friend's manner ofacting, and who perceived immediately, by a word, a gesture,or a sign from him, that the circumstances were serious,took Athos's arm, and went out without saying anything.Porthos followed, chatting with Aramis.

    On their way they met Grimaud.  Athos made him a sign tocome with them.  Grimaud, according to custom, obeyed insilence; the poor lad had nearly come to the pass offorgetting how to speak.

    They arrived at the drinking room of the Parpaillot.  It wasseven o'clock in the morning, and daylight began to appear.The three friends ordered breakfast, and went into a room inwhich the host said they would not be disturbed.

    Unfortunately, the hour was badly chosen for a privateconference.  The morning drum had just been beaten; everyoneshook off the drowsiness of night, and to dispel the humidmorning air, came to take a drop at the inn.  Dragoons,Swiss, Guardsmen, Musketeers, light-horsemen, succeeded oneanother with a rapidity which might answer the purpose ofthe host very well, but agreed badly with the views of thefour friends.  Thus they applied very curtly to thesalutations, healths, and jokes of their companions."I see how it will be," said Athos: "we shall get into somepretty quarrel or other, and we have no need of one justnow.  D'Artagnan, tell us what sort of a night you have had,and we will describe ours afterward."

    "Ah, yes," said a light-horseman, with a glass of brandy inhis hand, which he sipped slowly.  "I hear you gentlemen ofthe Guards have been in the trenches tonight, and that youdid not get much the best of the Rochellais."

    D'Artagnan looked at Athos to know if he ought to reply tothis intruder who thus mixed unmasked in their conversation."Well," said Athos, "don't you hear Monsieur de Busigny, whodoes you the honor to ask you a question?  Relate what haspassed during the night, since these gentlemen desire toknow it."

    "Have you not taken a bastion?" said a Swiss, who wasdrinking rum out of beer glass.

    "Yes, monsieur," said D'Artagnan, bowing, "we have had thathonor.  We even have, as you may have heard, introduced abarrel of powder under one of the angles, which in blowingup made a very pretty breach.  Without reckoning that as thebastion was not built yesterday all the rest of the buildingwas badly shaken."

    "And what bastion is it?" asked a dragoon, with his saberrun through a goose which he was taking to be cooked."The bastion St. Gervais," replied D'Artagnan, "from behindwhich the Rochellais annoyed our workmen."

    "Was that affair hot?"

    "Yes, moderately so.  We lost five men, and the Rochellaiseight or ten."

    "Balzempleu!" said the Swiss, who, notwithstanding theadmirable collection of oaths possessed by the Germanlanguage, had acquired a habit of swearing in French."But it is probable," said the light-horseman, "that theywill send pioneers this morning to repair the bastion.""Yes, that's probable," said D'Artagnan.

    "Gentlemen," said Athos, "a wager!"

    "Ah, wooi, a vager!" cried the Swiss.

    "What is it?" said the light-horseman.

    "Stop a bit," said the dragoon, placing his saber like aspit upon the two large iron dogs which held the firebrandsin the chimney, "stop a bit, I am in it.  You cursed host! adripping pan immediately, that I may not lose a drop of thefat of this estimable bird."

    "You was right," said the Swiss; "goose grease is kood withbasdry."

    "There!" said the dragoon.  "Now for the wager!  We listen, Monsieur Athos.""Yes, the wager!" said the light-horseman.

    "Well, Monsieur de Busigny, I will bet you," said Athos,"that my three companions, Messieurs Porthos, Aramis, andD'Artagnan, and myself, will go and breakfast in the bastionSt. Gervais, and we will remain there an hour, by the watch,whatever the enemy may do to dislodge us."

    Porthos and Aramis looked at each other; they began tocomprehend.

    "But," said D'Artagnan, in the ear of Athos, "you are goingto get us all killed without mercy."

    "We are much more likely to be killed," said Athos, "if wedo not go."

    "My faith, gentlemen," said Porthos, turning round upon hischair and twisting his mustache, "that's a fair bet, Ihope."

    "I take it," said M. de Busigny; "so let us fix the stake.""You are four gentlemen," said Athos, "and we are four; anunlimited dinner for eight.  Will that do?"

    "Capitally," replied M. de Busigny.

    "Perfectly," said the dragoon.

    "That shoots me," said the Swiss.

    The fourth auditor, who during all this conversation hadplayed a mute part, made a sign of the head in proof that heacquiesced in the proposition.

    "The breakfast for these gentlemen is ready," said the host."Well, bring it," said Athos.

    The host obeyed.  Athos called Grimaud, pointed to a largebasket which lay in a corner, and made a sign to him to wrapthe viands up in the napkins.

    Grimaud understood that it was to be a breakfast on thegrass, took the basket, packed up the viands, added thebottles, and then took the basket on his arm.

    "But where are you going to eat my breakfast?" asked thehost.

    "What matter, if you are paid for it?" said Athos, and hethrew two pistoles majestically on the table.

    "Shall I give you the change, my officer?" said the host."No, only add two bottles of champagne, and the differencewill be for the napkins."

    The host had not quite so good a bargain as he at firsthoped for, but he made amends by slipping in two bottles ofAnjou wine instead of two bottles of champagne.

    "Monsieur de Busigny," said Athos, "will you be so kind asto set your watch with mine, or permit me to regulate mineby yours?"

    "Which you please, monsieur!" said the light-horseman,drawing from his fob a very handsome watch, studded withdiamonds; "half past seven."

    "Thirty-five minutes after seven," said Athos, "by which youperceive I am five minutes faster than you."

    And bowing to all the astonished persons present, the youngmen took the road to the bastion St. Gervais, followed byGrimaud, who carried the basket, ignorant of where he wasgoing but in the passive obedience which Athos had taughthim not even thinking of asking.

    As long as they were within the circle of the camp, the fourfriends did not exchange one word; besides, they werefollowed by the curious, who, hearing of the wager, wereanxious to know how they would come out of it.  But whenonce they passed the line of circumvallation and foundthemselves in the open plain, D'Artagnan, who was completelyignorant of what was going forward, thought it was time todemand an explanation.

    "And now, my dear Athos," said he, "do me the kindness totell me where we are going?"

    "Why, you see plainly enough we are going to the bastion.""But what are we going to do there?"

    "You know well that we go to breakfast there."

    "But why did we not breakfast at the Parpaillot?""Because we have very important matters to communicate toone another, and it was impossible to talk five minutes inthat inn without being annoyed by all those importunatefellows, who keep coming in, saluting you, and addressingyou.  Here at least," said Athos, pointing to the bastion,"they will not come and disturb us."

    "It appears to me," said D'Artagnan, with that prudencewhich allied itself in him so naturally with excessivebravery, "that we could have found some retired place on thedowns or the seashore."

    "Where we should have been seen all four conferringtogether, so that at the end of a quarter of an hour thecardinal would have been informed by his spies that we wereholding a council."

    "Yes," said Aramis, "Athos is right: Animadvertuntur indesertis."

    "A desert would not have been amiss," said Porthos; "but itbehooved us to find it."

    "There is no desert where a bird cannot pass over one'shead, where a fish cannot leap out of the water, where arabbit cannot come out of its burrow, and I believe thatbird, fish, and rabbit each becomes a spy of the cardinal.Better, then, pursue our enterprise; from which, besides, wecannot retreat without shame.  We have made a wager--a wagerwhich could not have been foreseen, and of which I defyanyone to divine the true cause.  We are going, in order towin it, to remain an hour in the bastion.  Either we shallbe attacked, or not.  If we are not, we shall have all thetime to talk, and nobody will hear us--for I guarantee thewalls of the bastion have no ears; if we are, we will talkof our affairs just the same.  Moreover, in defendingourselves, we shall cover ourselves with glory.  You seethat everything is to our advantage."

    "Yes," said D'Artagnan; "but we shall indubitably attract aball."

    "Well, my dear," replied Athos, "you know well that theballs most to be dreaded are not from the enemy.""But for such an expedition we surely ought to have broughtour muskets."

    "You are stupid, friend Porthos.  Why should we loadourselves with a useless burden?"

    "I don't find a good musket, twelve cartridges, and a powderflask very useless in the face of an enemy."

    "Well," replied Athos, "have you not heard what D'Artagnansaid?"

    "What did he say?" demanded Porthos.

    "D'Artagnan said that in the attack of last night eight orten Frenchmen were killed, and as many Rochellais.""What then?"

    "The bodies were not plundered, were they?  It appears theconquerors had something else to do."

    "Well?"

    "Well, we shall find their muskets, their cartridges, andtheir flasks; and instead of four musketoons and twelveballs, we shall have fifteen guns and a hundred charges tofire."

    "Oh, Athos!" said Aramis, "truly you are a great man."Porthos nodded in sign of agreement.  D'Artagnan alone didnot seem convinced.

    Grimaud no doubt shared the misgivings of the young man, forseeing that they continued to advance toward the

    bastion--something he had till then doubted--he pulled hismaster by the skirt of his coat.

    "Where are we going?" asked he, by a gesture.

    Athos pointed to the bastion.

    "But," said Grimaud, in the same silent dialect, "we shallleave our skins there."

    Athos raised his eyes and his finger toward heaven.Grimaud put his basket on the ground and sat down with ashake of the head.

    Athos took a pistol from his belt, looked to see if it wasproperly primed, cocked it, and placed the muzzle close toGrimaud's ear.

    Grimaud was on his legs again as if by a spring.  Athos thenmade him a sign to take up his basket and to walk on first.Grimaud obeyed.  All that Grimaud gained by this momentarypantomime was to pass from the rear guard to the vanguard.Arrived at the bastion, the four friends turned round.More than three hundred soldiers of all kinds were assembledat the gate of the camp; and in a separate group might bedistinguished M. de Busigny, the dragoon, the Swiss, and thefourth bettor.

    Athos took off his hat, placed it on the end of his sword,and waved it in the air.

    All the spectators returned him his salute, accompanyingthis courtesy with a loud hurrah which was audible to thefour; after which all four disappeared in the bastion,whither Grimaud had preceded them.

    47  THE COUNCIL OF THE MUSKETEERS

    As Athos had foreseen, the bastion was only occupied by adozen corpses, French and Rochellais.

    "Gentlemen," said Athos, who had assumed the command of theexpedition, "while Grimaud spreads the table, let us beginby collecting the guns and cartridges together.  We can talkwhile performing that necessary task.  These gentlemen,"added he, pointing to the bodies, "cannot hear us.""But we could throw them into the ditch," said Porthos,"after having assured ourselves they have nothing in theirpockets."

    "Yes," said Athos, "that's Grimaud's business."

    "Well, then," cried D'Artagnan, "pray let Grimaud searchthem and throw them over the walls."

    "Heaven forfend!" said Athos; "they may serve us.""These bodies serve us?" said Porthos.  "You are mad, dearfriend."

    "Judge not rashly, say the gospel and the cardinal," repliedAthos. "How many guns, gentlemen?"

    "Twelve," replied Aramis.

    "How many shots?"

    "A hundred."

    "That's quite as many as we shall want.  Let us load theguns."

    The four Musketeers went to work; and as they were loadingthe last musket Grimaud announced that the breakfast wasready.

    Athos replied, always by gestures, that that was well, andindicated to Grimaud, by pointing to a turret that resembleda pepper caster, that he was to stand as sentinel.  Only, toalleviate the tediousness of the duty, Athos allowed him totake a loaf, two cutlets, and a bottle of wine.

    "And now to table," said Athos.

    The four friends seated themselves on the ground with theirlegs crossed like Turks, or even tailors.

    "And now," said D'Artagnan, "as there is no longer any fearof being overheard, I hope you are going to let me into yoursecret."

    "I hope at the same time to procure you amusement and glory,gentlemen," said Athos.  "I have induced you to take acharming promenade; here is a delicious breakfast; andyonder are five hundred persons, as you may see through theloopholes, taking us for heroes or madmen--two classes ofimbeciles greatly resembling each other."

    "But the secret!" said D'Artagnan.

    "The secret is," said Athos, "that I saw Milady last night."D'Artagnan was lifting a glass to his lips; but at the nameof Milady, his hand trembled so, that he was obliged to putthe glass on the ground again for fear of spilling thecontents."

    "You saw your wi--"

    "Hush!" interrupted Athos.  "You forget, my dear, you forgetthat these gentlemen are not initiated into my familyaffairs like yourself.  I have seen Milady."

    "Where?" demanded D'Artagnan.

    "Within two leagues of this place, at the inn of the RedDovecot."

    "In that case I am lost," said D'Artagnan.

    "Not so bad yet," replied Athos; "for by this time she musthave quit the shores of France."

    D'Artagnan breathed again.

    "But after all," asked Porthos, "who is Milady?"

    "A charming woman!" said Athos, sipping a glass of sparklingwine.  "Villainous host!" cried he, "he has given us Anjouwine instead of champagne, and fancies we know no better!Yes," continued he, "a charming woman, who entertained kindviews toward our friend D'Artagnan, who, on his part, hasgiven her some offense for which she tried to revengeherself a month ago by having him killed by two musketshots, a week ago by trying to poison him, and yesterday bydemanding his head of the cardinal."

    "What! by demanding my head of the cardinal?" criedD'Artagnan, pale with terror.

    "Yes, that is true as the Gospel," said Porthos; "I heardher with my own ears."

    "I also," said Aramis.

    "Then," said D'Artagnan, letting his arm fall withdiscouragement, "it is useless to struggle longer.  I may aswell blow my brains out, and all will be over."

    "That's the last folly to be committed," said Athos, "seeingit is the only one for which there is no remedy.""But I can never escape," said D'Artagnan, "with suchenemies.  First, my stranger of Meung; then De Wardes, towhom I have given three sword wounds; next Milady, whosesecret I have discovered; finally, the cardinal, whosevengeance I have balked."

    "Well," said Athos, "that only makes four; and we arefour-- one for one.  Pardieu! if we may believe the signsGrimaud is making, we are about to have to do with a verydifferent number of people.  What is it, Grimaud?Considering the gravity of the occasion, I permit you tospeak, my friend; but be laconic, I beg.  What do you see?""A troop."

    "Of how many persons?"

    "Twenty men."

    "What sort of men?"

    "Sixteen pioneers, four soldiers."

    "How far distant?"

    "Five hundred paces."

    "Good!  We have just time to finish this fowl and to drinkone glass of wine to your health, D'Artagnan."

    "To your health!" repeated Porthos and Aramis.

    "Well, then, to my health! although I am very much afraidthat your good wishes will not be of great service to me.""Bah!" said Athos, "God is great, as say the followers ofMohammed, and the future is in his hands."

    Then, swallowing the contents of his glass, which he putdown close to him, Athos arose carelessly, took the musketnext to him, and drew near to one of the loopholes.Porthos, Aramis and D'Artagnan followed his example.  As toGrimaud, he received orders to place himself behind the fourfriends in order to reload their weapons.

    "Pardieu!" said Athos, "it was hardly worth while todistribute ourselves for twenty fellows armed with pickaxes,mattocks, and shovels.  Grimaud had only to make them a signto go away, and I am convinced they would have left us inpeace."

    "I doubt that," replied D'Artagnan, "for they are advancingvery resolutely.  Besides, in addition to the pioneers,there are four soldiers and a brigadier, armed withmuskets."

    "That's because they don't see us," said Athos.

    "My faith," said Aramis, "I must confess I feel a greatrepugnance to fire on these poor devils of civilians.""He is a bad priest," said Porthos, "who has pity forheretics."

    "In truth," said Athos, "Aramis is right.  I will warnthem."

    "What the devil are you going to do?" cried D'Artagnan, "youwill be shot."

    But Athos heeded not his advice.  Mounting on the breach,with his musket in one hand and his hat in the other, hesaid, bowing courteously and addressing the soldiers and thepioneers, who, astonished at this apparition, stopped fiftypaces from the bastion:  "Gentlemen, a few friends andmyself are about to breakfast in this bastion.  Now, youknow nothing is more disagreeable than being disturbed whenone is at breakfast.  We request you, then, if you reallyhave business here, to wait till we have finished or repast,or to come again a short time hence, unless; unless, whichwould be far better, you form the salutary resolution toquit the side of the rebels, and come and drink with us tothe health of the King of France."

    "Take care, Athos!" cried D'Artagnan; "don't you see theyare aiming?"

    "Yes, yes," said Athos; "but they are only civilians--verybad marksmen, who will be sure not to hit me."

    In fact, at the same instant four shots were fired, and theballs were flattened against the wall around Athos, but notone touched him.

    Four shots replied to them almost instantaneously, but muchbetter aimed than those of the aggressors; three soldiersfell dead, and one of the pioneers was wounded.

    "Grimaud," said Athos, still on the breach, "anothermusket!"

    Grimaud immediately obeyed.  On their part, the threefriends had reloaded their arms; a second discharge followedthe first.  The brigadier and two pioneers fell dead; therest of the troop took to flight.

    "Now, gentlemen, a sortie!" cried Athos.

    And the four friends rushed out of the fort, gained thefield of battle, picked up the four muskets of the privatesand the half-pike of the brigadier, and convinced that thefugitives would not stop till they reached the city, turnedagain toward the bastion, bearing with them the trophies oftheir victory.

    "Reload the muskets, Grimaud," said Athos, "and we,gentlemen, will go on with our breakfast, and resume ourconversation.  Where were we?"

    "I recollect you were saying," said D'Artagnan, "that afterhaving demanded my head of the cardinal, Milady had quit theshores of France.  Whither goes she?" added he, stronglyinterested in the route Milady followed.

    "She goes into England," said Athos.

    "With what view?"

    "With the view of assassinating, or causing to beassassinated, the Duke of Buckingham."

    D'Artagnan uttered an exclamation of surprise andindignation.

    "But this is infamous!" cried he.

    "As to that," said Athos, "I beg you to believe that I carevery little about it.  Now you have done, Grimaud, take ourbrigadier's half-pike, tie a napkin to it, and plant it ontop of our bastion, that these rebels of Rochellais may seethat they have to deal with brave and loyal soldiers of theking."

    Grimaud obeyed without replying.  An instant afterward, thewhite flag was floating over the heads of the four friends.A thunder of applause saluted its appearance; half the campwas at the barrier.

    "How?" replied D'Artagnan, "you care little if she killsBuckingham or causes him to be killed?  But the duke is ourfriend."

    "The duke is English; the duke fights against us.  Let herdo what she likes with the duke; I care no more about himthan an empty bottle."  And Athos threw fifteen paces fromhim an empty bottle from which he had poured the last dropinto his glass.

    "A moment," said D'Artagnan.  "I will not abandon Buckinghamthus.  He gave us some very fine horses."

    "And moreover, very handsome saddles," said Porthos, who atthe moment wore on his cloak the lace of his own."Besides," said Aramis, "God desires the conversion and notthe death of a sinner."

    "Amen!" said Athos, "and we will return to that subjectlater, if such be your pleasure; but what for the momentengaged my attention most earnestly, and I am sure you willunderstand me, D'Artagnan, was the getting from this woman akind of carte blanche which she had extorted from thecardinal, and by means of which she could with impunity getrid of you and perhaps of us."

    "But this creature must be a demon!" said Porthos, holdingout his plate to Aramis, who was cutting up a fowl."And this carte blanche," said D'Artagnan, "this carteblanche, does it remain in her hands?"

    "No, it passed into mine; I will not say without trouble,for if I did I should tell a lie."

    "My dear Athos, I shall no longer count the number of timesI am indebted to you for my life."

    "Then it was to go to her that you left us?" said Aramis."Exactly."

    "And you have that letter of the cardinal?" said D'Artagnan."Here it is," said Athos; and he took the invaluable paperfrom the pocket of his uniform.  D'Artagnan unfolded it withone hand, whose trembling he did not even attempt toconceal, to read:

    Dec. 3, 1627

    It is by more order and for the good of the state that thebearer of this has done what he has done.

    "Richelieu"

    "In fact," said Aramis, "it is an absolution according to rule.""That paper must be torn to pieces," said D'Artagnan, whofancied he read in it his sentence of death.

    "On the contrary," said Athos, "it must be preservedcarefully.  I would not give up this paper if covered withas many gold pieces."

    "And what will she do now?" asked the young man.

    "Why," replied Athos, carelessly, "she is probably going towrite to the cardinal that a damned Musketeer, named Athos,has taken her safe-conduct from her by force; she willadvise him in the same letter to get rid of his two friends,Aramis and Porthos, at the same time.  The cardinal willremember that these are the same men who have often crossedhis path; and then some fine morning he will arrestD'Artagnan, and for fear he should feel lonely, he will sendus to keep him company in the Bastille."

    "Go to!  It appears to me you make dull jokes, my dear,"said Porthos.

    "I do not jest," said Athos.

    "Do you know," said Porthos, "that to twist that damnedMilady's neck would be a smaller sin than to twist those ofthese poor devils of Huguenots, who have committed no othercrime than singing in French the psalms we sing in Latin?""What says the abbe?" asked Athos, quietly.

    "I say I am entirely of Porthos's opinion," replied Aramis."And I, too," said D'Artagnan.

    "Fortunately, she is far off," said Porthos, "for I confessshe would worry me if she were here."

    "She worries me in England as well as in France," saidAthos.

    "She worries me everywhere," said D'Artagnan.

    "But when you held her in your power, why did you not drownher, strangle her, hang her?" said Porthos.  "It is only thedead who do not return."

    "You think so, Porthos?" replied the Musketeer, with a sadsmile which D'Artagnan alone understood.

    "I have an idea," said D'Artagnan.

    "What is it?" said the Musketeers.

    "To arms!" cried Grimaud.

    The young men sprang up, and seized their muskets.This time a small troop advanced, consisting of from twentyto twenty-five men; but they were not pioneers, they weresoldiers of the garrison.

    "Shall we return to the camp?" said Porthos.  "I don't thinkthe sides are equal."

    "Impossible, for three reasons," replied Athos.  "The first,that we have not finished breakfast; the second, that westill have some very important things to say; and the third,that it yet wants ten minutes before the lapse of the hour.""Well, then," said Aramis, "we must form a plan of battle.""That's very simple," replied Athos.  "As soon as the enemyare within musket shot, we must fire upon them.  If theycontinue to advance, we must fire again.  We must fire aslong as we have loaded guns.  If those who remain of thetroop persist in coming to the assault, we will allow thebesiegers to get as far as the ditch, and then we will pushdown upon their heads that strip of wall which keeps itsperpendicular by a miracle."

    "Bravo!" cried Porthos.  "Decidedly, Athos, you were born tobe a general, and the cardinal, who fancies himself a greatsoldier, is nothing beside you."

    "Gentlemen," said Athos, "no divided attention, I beg; leteach one pick out his man."

    "I cover mine," said D'Artagnan.

    "And I mine," said Porthos.

    "And I mine," said Aramis.

    "Fire, then," said Athos.

    The four muskets made but one report, but four men fell.The drum immediately beat, and the little troop advanced atcharging pace.

    Then the shots were repeated without regularity, but alwaysaimed with the same accuracy.  Nevertheless, as if they hadbeen aware of the numerical weakness of the friends, theRochellais continued to advance in quick time.

    With every three shots at least two men fell; but the marchof those who remained was not slackened.

    Arrived at the foot of the bastion, there were still morethan a dozen of the enemy.  A last discharge welcomed them,but did not stop them; they jumped into the ditch, andprepared to scale the breach.

    "Now, my friends," said Athos, "finish them at a blow.  Tothe wall; to the wall!"

    And the four friends, seconded by Grimaud, pushed with thebarrels of their muskets an enormous sheet of the wall,which bent as if pushed by the wind, and detaching itselffrom its base, fell with a horrible crash into the ditch.Then a fearful crash was heard; a cloud of dust mountedtoward the sky--and all was over!

    "Can we have destroyed them all, from the first to thelast?" said Athos.

    "My faith, it appears so!" said D'Artagnan.

    "No," cried Porthos; "there go three or four, limping away."In fact, three or four of these unfortunate men, coveredwith dirt and blood, fled along the hollow way, and atlength regained the city.  These were all who were left ofthe little troop.

    Athos looked at his watch.

    "Gentlemen," said he, "we have been here an hour, and ourwager is won; but we will be fair players.  Besides,D'Artagnan has not told us his idea yet."

    And the Musketeer, with his usual coolness, reseated himselfbefore the remains of the breakfast.

    "My idea?" said D'Artagnan.

    "Yes; you said you had an idea," said Athos.

    "Oh, I remember," said D'Artagnan.  "Well, I will go toEngland a second time; I will go and find Buckingham.""You shall not do that, D'Artagnan," said Athos, coolly."And why not?  Have I not been there once?"

    "Yes; but at that period we were not at war.  At that periodBuckingham was an ally, and not an enemy.  What you wouldnow do amounts to treason."

    D'Artagnan perceived the force of this reasoning, and wassilent.

    "But," said Porthos, "I think I have an idea, in my turn.""Silence for Monsieur Porthos's idea!" said Aramis."I will ask leave of absence of Monsieur de Treville, onsome pretext or other which you must invent; I am not veryclever at pretexts.  Milady does not know me; I will getaccess to her without her suspecting me, and when I catch mybeauty, I will strangle her."

    "Well," replied Athos, "I am not far from approving the ideaof Monsieur Porthos."

    "For shame!" said Aramis.  "Kill a woman?  No, listen to me;I have the true idea."

    "Let us see your idea, Aramis," said Athos, who felt muchdeference for the young Musketeer."

    "We must inform the queen."

    "Ah, my faith, yes!" said Porthos and D'Artagnan, at thesame time; "we are coming nearer to it now."

    "Inform the queen!" said Athos; "and how?  Have we relationswith the court?  Could we send anyone to Paris without itsbeing known in the camp?  From here to Paris it is a hundredand forty leagues; before our letter was at Angers we shouldbe in a dungeon."

    "As to remitting a letter with safety to her Majesty," saidAramis, coloring, "I will take that upon myself.  I know aclever person at Tours--"

    Aramis stopped on seeing Athos smile.

    "Well, do you not adopt this means, Athos?" said D'Artagnan."I do not reject it altogether," said Athos; "but I wish toremind Aramis that he cannot quit the camp, and that nobodybut one of ourselves is trustworthy; that two hours afterthe messenger has set out, all the Capuchins, all thepolice, all the black caps of the cardinal, will know yourletter by heart, and you and your clever person will bearrested."

    "Without reckoning," objected Porthos, "that the queen wouldsave Monsieur de Buckingham, but would take no heed of us.""Gentlemen," said D'Artagnan, "what Porthos says is full ofsense."

    "Ah, ah! but what's going on in the city yonder?" saidAthos.

    "They are beating the general alarm."

    The four friends listened, and the sound of the drum plainlyreached them.

    "You see, they are going to send a whole regiment againstus," said Athos.

    "You don't think of holding out against a whole regiment, doyou?" said Porthos.

    "Why not?" said Musketeer.  "I feel myself quite in a humorfor it; and I would hold out before an army if we had takenthe precaution to bring a dozen more bottles of wine.""Upon my word, the drum draws near," said D'Artagnan."Let it come," said Athos.  "It is a quarter of an hour'sjourney from here to the city, consequently a quarter of anhour's journey from the city to hither.  That is more thantime enough for us to devise a plan.  If we go from thisplace we shall never find another so suitable.  Ah, stop! Ihave it, gentlemen; the right idea has just occurred to me.""Tell us."

    "Allow me to give Grimaud some indispensable orders."Athos made a sign for his lackey to approach.

    "Grimaud," said Athos, pointing to the bodies which layunder the wall of the bastion, "take those gentlemen, setthem up against the wall, put their hats upon their heads,and their guns in their hands."

    "Oh, the great man!" cried D'Artagnan.  "I comprehend now.""You comprehend?" said Porthos.

    "And do you comprehend, Grimaud?" said Aramis.

    Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative.

    "That's all that is necessary," said Athos; "now for myidea."

    "I should like, however, to comprehend," said Porthos."That is useless."

    "Yes, yes!  Athos's idea!" cried Aramis and D'Artagnan, atthe same time.

    "This Milady, this woman, this creature, this demon, has abrother-in-law, as I think you told me, D'Artagnan?""Yes, I know him very well; and I also believe that he hasnot a very warm affection for his sister-in-law.""There is no harm in that.  If he detested her, it would beall the better," replied Athos.

    "In that case we are as well off as we wish."

    "And yet," said Porthos, "I would like to know what Grimaudis about."

    "Silence, Porthos!" said Aramis.

    "What is her brother-in-law's name?"

    "Lord de Winter."

    "Where is he now?"

    "He returned to London at the first sound of war.""Well, there's just the man we want," said Athos.  "It is hewhom we must warm.  We will have him informed that hissister-in-law is on the point of having someone

    assassinated, and beg him not to lose sight of her.  Thereis in London, I hope, some establishment like that of theMagdalens, or of the Repentant Daughters.  He must place hissister in one of these, and we shall be in peace.""Yes," said D'Artagnan, "till she comes out."

    "Ah, my faith!" said Athos, "you require too much,D'Artagnan.  I have given you all I have, and I beg leave totell you that this is the bottom of my sack."

    "But I think it would be still better," said Aramis, "toinform the queen and Lord de Winter at the same time.""Yes; but who is to carry the letter to Tours, and who toLondon?"

    "I answer for Bazin," said Aramis.

    "And I for Planchet," said D'Artagnan.

    "Ay," said Porthos, "if we cannot leave the camp, ourlackeys may."

    "To be sure they may; and this very day we will write theletters," said Aramis.  "Give the lackeys money, and theywill start."

    "We will give them money?" replied Athos.  "Have you anymoney?"

    The four friends looked at one another, and a cloud cameover the brows which but lately had been so cheerful."Look out!" cried D'Artagnan, "I see black points and redpoints moving yonder.  Why did you talk of a regiment,Athos?  It is a veritable army!"

    "My faith, yes," said Athos; "there they are.  See thesneaks come, without drum or trumpet.  Ah, ah! have youfinished, Grimaud?"

    Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative, and pointed to adozen bodies which he had set up in the most picturesqueattitudes.  Some carried arms, others seemed to be takingaim, and the remainder appeared merely to be sword in hand."Bravo!" said Athos; "that does honor to your imagination.""All very well," said Porthos, "but I should like tounderstand."

    "Let us decamp first, and you will understand afterward.""A moment, gentlemen, a moment; give Grimaud time to clearaway the breakfast."

    "Ah, ah!" said Aramis, "the black points and the red pointsare visibly enlarging.  I am of D'Artagnan's opinion; wehave no time to lose in regaining our camp."

    "My faith," said Athos, "I have nothing to say against aretreat.  We bet upon one hour, and we have stayed an hourand a half.  Nothing can be said; let us be off, gentlemen,let us be off!"

    Grimaud was already ahead, with the basket and the dessert.The four friends followed, ten paces behind him.

    "What the devil shall we do now, gentlemen?" cried Athos."Have you forgotten anything?" said Aramis.

    "The white flag, morbleu!  We must not leave a flag in thehands of the enemy, even if that flag be but a napkin."And Athos ran back to the bastion, mounted the platform, andbore off the flag; but as the Rochellais had arrived withinmusket range, they opened a terrible fire upon this man, whoappeared to expose himself for pleasure's sake.

    But Athos might be said to bear a charmed life.  The ballspassed and whistled all around him; not one struck him.Athos waved his flag, turning his back on the guards of thecity, and saluting those of the camp.  On both sides loudcries arose--on the one side cries of anger, on the othercries of enthusiasm.

    A second discharge followed the first, and three balls, bypassing through it, made the napkin really a flag.  "Crieswere heard from the camp, "Come down! come down!"Athos came down; his friends, who anxiously awaited him, sawhim returned with joy.

    "Come along, Athos, come along!" cried D'Artagnan; "now wehave found everything except money, it would be stupid to bekilled."

    But Athos continued to march majestically, whatever remarkshis companions made; and they, finding their remarksuseless, regulated their pace by his.

    Grimaud and his basket were far in advance, out of the rangeof the balls.

    At the end of an instant they heard a furious fusillade."What's that?" asked Porthos, "what are they firing at now?I hear no balls whistle, and I see nobody!"

    "They are firing at the corpses," replied Athos.

    "But the dead cannot return their fire."

    "Certainly not!  They will then fancy it is an ambuscade,they will deliberate; and by the time they have found outthe pleasantry, we shall be out of the range of their balls.That renders it useless to get a pleurisy by too muchhaste."

    "Oh, I comprehend now," said the astonished Porthos."That's lucky," said Athos, shrugging his shoulders.On their part, the French, on seeing the four friends returnat such a step, uttered cries of enthusiasm.

    At length a fresh discharge was heard, and this time theballs came rattling among the stones around the fourfriends, and whistling sharply in their ears.  TheRochellais had at last taken possession of the bastion."These Rochellais are bungling fellows," said Athos; "howmany have we killed of them--a dozen?"

    "Or fifteen."

    "How many did we crush under the wall?"

    "Eight or ten."

    "And in exchange for all that not even a scratch!  Ah, butwhat is the matter with your hand, D'Artagnan?  It bleeds,seemingly."

    "Oh, it's nothing," said D'Artagnan.

    "A spent ball?"

    "Not even that."

    "What is it, then?"

    We have said that Athos loved D'Artagnan like a child, andthis somber and inflexible personage felt the anxiety of aparent for the young man.

    "Only grazed a little," replied D'Artagnan; "my fingers werecaught between two stones--that of the wall and that of myring--and the skin was broken."

    "That comes of wearing diamonds, my master," said Athos,disdainfully.

    "Ah, to be sure," cried Porthos, "there is a diamond.  Whythe devil, then, do we plague ourselves about money, whenthere is a diamond?"

    "Stop a bit!" said Aramis.

    "Well thought of, Porthos; this time you have an idea.""Undoubtedly," said Porthos, drawing himself up at Athos'scompliment; "as there is a diamond, let us sell it.""But," said D'Artagnan, "it is the queen's diamond.""The stronger reason why it should be sold," replied Athos.The queen saving Monsieur de Buckingham, her lover; nothingmore just.  The queen saving us, her friends; nothing moremoral.  Let us sell the diamond.  What says Monsieur theAbbe?  I don't ask Porthos; his opinion has been given.""Why, I think," said Aramis, blushing as usual, "that hisring not coming from a mistress, and consequently not beinga love token, D'Artagnan may sell it."

    "My dear Aramis, you speak like theology personified.  Youradvice, then, is--"

    "To sell the diamond," replied Aramis.

    "Well, then," said D'Artagnan, gaily, "let us sell thediamond, and say no more about it."

    The fusillade continued; but the four friends were out ofreach, and the Rochellais only fired to appease theirconsciences.

    "My faith, it was time that idea came into Porthos's head.Here we are at the camp; therefore, gentlemen, not a wordmore of this affair.  We are observed; they are coming tomeet us.  We shall be carried in triumph."

    In fact, as we have said, the whole camp was in motion.More than two thousand persons had assisted, as at aspectacle, in this fortunate but wild undertaking of thefour friends--and undertaking of which they were far fromsuspecting the real motive.  Nothing was heard but cried of"Live the Musketeers!  Live the Guards!"  M. de Busigny wasthe first to come and shake Athos by the hand, andacknowledge that the wager was lost.  The dragoon and theSwiss followed him, and all their comrades followed thedragoon and the Swiss.  There was nothing but felicitations,pressures of the hand, and embraces; there was no end to theinextinguishable laughter at the Rochellais.  The tumult atlength became so great that the cardinal fancied there mustbe some riot, and sent La Houdiniere, his captain of theGuards, to inquire what was going on.

    The affair was described to the messenger with all theeffervescence of enthusiasm.

    "Well?" asked the cardinal, on seeing La Houdiniere return."Well, monseigneur," replied the latter, "three Musketeersand a Guardsman laid a wager with Monsieur de Busigny thatthey would go and breakfast in the bastion St. Gervais; andwhile breakfasting they held it for two hours against theenemy, and have killed I don't know how many Rochellais.""Did you inquire the names of those three Musketeers?""Yes, monseigneur."

    "What are their names?"

    "Messieurs Athos, Porthos, and Aramis."

    "Still my three brave fellows!" murmured the cardinal.  "Andthe Guardsman?"

    "D'Artagnan."

    "Still my young scapegrace.  Positively, these four men mustbe on my side."

    The same evening the cardinal spoke to M. de Treville of theexploit of the morning, which was the talk of the wholecamp.  M. de Treville, who had received the account of theadventure from the mouths of the heroes of it, related it inall its details to his Eminence, not forgetting the episodeof the napkin.

    "That's well, Monsieur de Treville," said the cardinal;"pray let that napkin be sent to me.  I will have threefleur-de-lis embroidered on it in gold, and will give it toyour company as a standard."

    "Monseigneur," said M. de Treville, "that will be unjust tothe Guardsmen.  Monsieur d'Artagnan is not with me; heserves under Monsieur Dessessart."

    "Well, then, take him," said the cardinal; "when four menare so much attached to one another, it is only fair thatthey should serve in the same company."

    That same evening M. de Treville announced this good news tothe three Musketeers and D'Artagnan, inviting all four tobreakfast with him next morning.

    D'Artagnan refused; but thinking the opportunity a good one,dream of his life had been to become a Musketeer.  The threefriends were likewise greatly delighted.

    "My faith," said D'Artagnan to Athos, "you had a triumphantidea!  As you said, we have acquired glory, and were enabledto carry on a conversation of the highest importance.""Which we can resume now without anybody suspecting us, for,with the help of God, we shall henceforth pass forcardinalists."

    That evening D'Artagnan went to present his respects to M.Dessessart, and inform him of his promotion.

    M. Dessessart, who esteemed D'Artagnan, made him offers ofhelp, as this change would entail expenses for equipment.D'Artagnan was beside himself with joy.  We know that the hebegged him to have the diamond he put into his hand valued,as he wished to turn it into money.

    The next day, M. Dessessart's valet came to D'Artagnan'slodging, and gave him a bag containing seven thousandlivres.

    This was the price of the queen's diamond.

    48  A FAMILY AFFAIR

    Athos had invented the phrase, family affair.  A familyaffair was not subject to the investigation of the cardinal;a family affair concerned nobody.  People might employthemselves in a family affair before all the world.Therefore Athos had invented the phrase, family affair.Aramis had discovered the idea, the lackeys.

    Porthos had discovered the means, the diamond.

    D'Artagnan alone had discovered nothing--he, ordinarily themost inventive of the four; but it must be also said thatthe very name of Milady paralyzed him.

    Ah! no, we were mistaken; he had discovered a purchaser forhis diamond.

    The breakfast at M. de Treville's was as gay and cheerful aspossible.  D'Artagnan already wore his uniform--for beingnearly of the same size as Aramis, and as Aramis was soliberally paid by the publisher who purchased his poem as toallow him to buy everything double, he sold his friend acomplete outfit.

    D'Artagnan would have been at the height of his wishes if hehad not constantly seen Milady like a dark cloud hovering inthe horizon.

    After breakfast, it was agreed that they should meet againin the evening at Athos's lodging, and there finish theirplans.

    D'Artagnan passed the day in exhibiting his Musketeer'suniform in every street of the camp.

    In the evening, at the appointed hour, the four friends met.There only remained three things to decide--what theyshould write to Milady's brother; what they should write tothe clever person at Tours; and which should be the lackeysto carry the letters.

    Everyone offered his own.  Athos talked of the discretion ofGrimaud, who never spoke a word but when his master unlockedhis mouth.  Porthos boasted of the strength of Mousqueton,who was big enough to thrash four men of ordinary size.Aramis, confiding in the address of Bazin, made a pompouseulogium on his candidate.  Finally, D'Artagnan had entirefaith in the bravery of Planchet, and reminded them of themanner in which he had conducted himself in the ticklishaffair of Boulogne.

    These four virtues disputed the prize for a length of time,and gave birth to magnificent speeches which we do notrepeat here for fear they should be deemed too long."Unfortunately," said Athos, "he whom we send must possessin himself alone the four qualities united."

    "But where is such a lackey to be found?"

    "Not to be found!" cried Athos.  "I know it well, so takeGrimaud."

    "Take Mousqueton."

    "Take Bazin."

    "Take Planchet.  Planchet is brave and shrewd; they are twoqualities out of the four."

    "Gentlemen," said Aramis, "the principal question is not toknow which of our four lackeys is the most discreet, themost strong, the most clever, or the most brave; theprincipal thing is to know which loves money the best.""What Aramis says is very sensible," replied Athos; "we mustspeculate upon the faults of people, and not upon theirvirtues.  Monsieur Abbe, you are a great moralist.""Doubtless," said Aramis, "for we not only require to bewell served in order to succeed, but moreover, not to fail;for in case of failure, heads are in question, not for ourlackeys--"

    "Speak lower, Aramis," said Athos.

    "That's wise--not for the lackeys," resumed Aramis, "but forthe master--for the masters, we may say.  Are our lackeyssufficiently devoted to us to risk their lives for us?  No.""My faith," said D'Artagnan.  "I would almost answer forPlanchet."

    "Well, my dear friend, add to his natural devotedness a goodsum of money, and then, instead of answering for him once,answer for him twice."

    "Why, good God! you will be deceived just the same," saidAthos, who was an optimist when things were concerned, and apessimist when men were in question.  "They will promiseeverything for the sake of the money, and on the road fearwill prevent them from acting.  Once taken, they will bepressed; when pressed, they will confess everything.  Whatthe devil! we are not children.  To reach England"--Athoslowered his voice--"all France, covered with spies andcreatures of the cardinal, must be crossed.  A passport forembarkation must be obtained; and the party must beacquainted with English in order to ask the way to London.Really, I think the thing very difficult."

    "Not at all," cried D'Artagnan, who was anxious the mattershould be accomplished; "on the contrary, I think it veryeasy.  It would be, no doubt, parbleu, if we write to Lordde Winter about affairs of vast importance, of the horrorsof the cardinal--"

    "Speak lower!" said Athos.

    "--of intrigues and secrets of state," continued D'Artagnan,complying with the recommendation.  "there can be no doubtwe would all be broken on the wheel; but for God's sake, donot forget, as you yourself said, Athos, that we only writeto him concerning a family affair; that we only write to himto entreat that as soon as Milady arrives in London he willput it out of her power to injure us.  I will write to him,then, nearly in these terms."

    "Let us see," said Athos, assuming in advance a criticallook.

    "Monsieur and dear friend--"

    "Ah, yes!  Dear friend to an Englishman," interrupted Athos;"well commenced!  Bravo, D'Artagnan!  Only with that wordyou would be quartered instead of being broken on thewheel."

    "Well, perhaps.  I will say, then, Monsieur, quite short.""You may even say, My Lord," replied Athos, who stickled forpropriety.

    "My Lord, do you remember the little goat pasture of theLuxembourg?"

    "Good, the Luxembourg!  One might believe this is anallusion to the queen-mother!  That's ingenious," saidAthos.

    "Well, then, we will put simply, My Lord, do you remember acertain little enclosure where your life was spared?""My dear D'Artagnan, you will never make anything but a verybad secretary.  Where your life was spared!  For shame!that's unworthy.  A man of spirit is not to be reminded ofsuch services.  A benefit reproached is an offensecommitted."

    "The devil!" said D'Artagnan, "you are insupportable.  Ifthe letter must be written under your censure, my faith, Irenounce the task."

    "And you will do right.  Handle the musket and the sword, mydear fellow.  You will come off splendidly at those twoexercises; but pass the pen over to Monsieur Abbe.  That'shis province."

    "Ay, ay!" said Porthos; "pass the pen to Aramis, who writestheses in Latin."

    "Well, so be it," said D'Artagnan.  "Draw up this note forus, Aramis; but by our Holy Father the Pope, cut it short,for I shall prune you in my turn, I warn you."

    "I ask no better," said Aramis, with that ingenious air ofconfidence which every poet has in himself; "but let me beproperly acquainted with the subject.  I have heard here andthere that this sister-in-law was a hussy.  I have obtainedproof of it by listening to her conversation with thecardinal."

    "Lower! sacre bleu!" said Athos.

    "But," continued Aramis, "the details escape me.""And me also," said Porthos.

    D'Artagnan and Athos looked at each other for some time insilence.  At length Athos, after serious reflection andbecoming more pale than usual, made a sign of assent toD'Artagnan, who by it understood he was at liberty to speak."Well, this is what you have to say," said D'Artagnan:  "MyLord, your sister-in-law is an infamous woman, who wished tohave you killed that she might inherit your wealth; but shecould not marry your brother, being already married inFrance, and having been--" D'Artagnan stopped, as ifseeking for the word, and looked at Athos.

    "Repudiated by her husband," said Athos.

    "Because she had been branded," continued D'Artagnan."Bah!" cried Porthos.  "Impossible!  What do you say--thatshe wanted to have her brother-in-law killed?"

    "Yes."

    "She was married?" asked Aramis.

    "Yes."

    "And her husband found out that she had a fleur-de-lis onher shoulder?" cried Porthos.

    "Yes."

    These three yeses had been pronounced by Athos, each with asadder intonation.

    "And who has seen this fleur-de-lis?" inquired Aramis."D'Artagnan and I.  Or rather, to observe the chronologicalorder, I and D'Artagnan," replied Athos.

    "And does the husband of this frightful creature stilllive?"  said Aramis.

    "He still lives."

    "Are you quite sure of it?"

    "I am he."

    There was a moment of cold silence, during which everyonewas affected according to his nature.

    "This time," said Athos, first breaking the silence,"D'Artagnan has given us an excellent program, and theletter must be written at once."

    "The devil!  You are right, Athos," said Aramis; "and it isa rather difficult matter.  The chancellor himself would bepuzzled how to write such a letter, and yet the chancellordraws up an official report very readily.  Never mind!  Besilent, I will write."

    Aramis accordingly took the quill, reflected for a fewmoments, wrote eight or ten lines in a charming littlefemale hand, and then with a voice soft and slow, as if eachword had been scrupulously weighed, he read the following:

    "My Lord, The person who writes these few lines had thehonor of crossing swords with you in the little enclosure ofthe Rue d'Enfer.  As you have several times since declaredyourself the friend of that person, he thinks it his duty torespond to that friendship by sending you importantinformation.  Twice you have nearly been the victim of a nearrelative, whom you believe to be your heir because youare ignorant that before she contracted a marriage inEngland she was already married in France.  But the thirdtime, which is the present, you may succumb.  Your relativeleft La Rochelle for England during the night.  Watch herarrival, for she has great and terrible projects.  If yourequire to know positively what she is capable of, read herpast history on her left shoulder."

    "Well, now that will do wonderfully well," said Athos.  "Mydear Aramis, you have the pen of a secretary of state.  Lordde Winter will now be upon his guard if the letter shouldreach him; and even if it should fall into the hands of thecardinal, we shall not be compromised.  But as the lackeywho goes may make us believe he has been to London and maystop at Chatellerault, let us give him only half the sumpromised him, with the letter, with an agreement that heshall have the other half in exchange for the reply.  Haveyou the diamond?" continued Athos.

    "I have what is still better.  I have the price"; andD'Artagnan threw the bag upon the table.  At the sound ofthe gold Aramis raised his eyes and Porthos started.  As toAthos, he remained unmoved.

    "How much in that little bag?"

    "Seven thousand livres, in louis of twelve francs.""Seven thousand livres!" cried Porthos.  "That poor littlediamond was worth seven thousand livres?"

    "It appears so," said Athos, "since here they are.  I don'tsuppose that our friend D'Artagnan has added any of his ownto the amount."

    "But, gentlemen, in all this," said D'Artagnan, "we do notthink of the queen.  Let us take some heed of the welfare ofher dear Buckingham.  That is the least we owe her.""That's true," said Athos; "but that concerns Aramis.""Well," replied the latter, blushing, "what must I say?""Oh, that's simple enough!" replied Athos.  "Write a secondletter for that clever personage who lives at Tours."Aramis resumed his pen, reflected a little, and wrote thefollowing lines, which he immediately submitted to theapprobation of his friends.

    "My dear cousin."

    "Ah, ah!" said Athos.  "This clever person is your relative,then?"

    "Cousin-german."

    "Go on, to your cousin, then!"

    Aramis continued:

    "My dear Cousin, His Eminence, the cardinal, whom Godpreserve for the happiness of France and the confusion ofthe enemies of the kingdom, is on the point of putting anend to the hectic rebellion of La Rochelle.  It is probablethat the succor of the English fleet will never even arrivein sight of the place.  I will even venture to say that I amcertain M. de Buckingham will be prevented from setting outby some great event.  His Eminence is the most illustriouspolitician of times past, of times present, and probably oftimes to come.  He would extinguish the sun if the sunincommoded him.  Give these happy tidings to your sister, mydear cousin.  I have dreamed that the unlucky Englishman wasdead.  I cannot recollect whether it was by steel or bypoison; only of this I am sure, I have dreamed he was dead,and you know my dreams never deceive me.  Be assured, then,of seeing me soon return."

    "Capital!" cried Athos; "you are the king of poets, my dearAramis.  You speak like the Apocalypse, and you are as trueas the Gospel.  There is nothing now to do but to put theaddress to this letter."

    "That is easily done," said Aramis.

    He folded the letter fancifully, and took up his pen andwrote:

    "To Mlle. Michon, seamstress, Tours."

    The three friends looked at one another and laughed; theywere caught.

    "Now," said Aramis, "you will please to understand,gentlemen, that Bazin alone can carry this letter to Tours.My cousin knows nobody but Bazin, and places confidence innobody but him; any other person would fail.  Besides, Bazinis ambitious and learned; Bazin has read history, gentlemen,he knows that Sixtus the Fifth became Pope after having keptpigs.  Well, as he means to enter the Church at the sametime as myself, he does not despair of becoming Pope in histurn, or at least a cardinal.  You can understand that a manwho has such views will never allow himself to be taken, orif taken, will undergo martyrdom rather than speak.""Very well," said D'Artagnan, "I consent to Bazin with allmy heart, but grant me Planchet.  Milady had him one dayturned out of doors, with sundry blows of a good stick toaccelerate his motions.  Now, Planchet has an excellentmemory; and I will be bound that sooner than relinquish anypossible means of vengeance, he will allow himself to bebeaten to death.  If your arrangements at Tours are yourarrangements, Aramis, those of London are mine.  I request,then, that Planchet may be chosen, more particularly as hehas already been to London with me, and knows how to speakcorrectly:  London, sir, if you please, and my master, Lordd'Artagnan.  With that you may be satisfied he can make hisway, both going and returning."

    "In that case," said Athos, "Planchet must receive sevenhundred livres for going, and seven hundred livres forcoming back; and Bazin, three hundred livres for going, andthree hundred livres for returning--that will reduce the sumto five thousand livres.  We will each take a thousandlivres to be employed as seems good, and we will leave afund of a thousand livres under the guardianship of MonsieurAbbe here, for extraordinary occasions or common wants.Will that do?"

    "My dear Athos," said Aramis, "you speak like Nestor, whowas, as everyone knows, the wisest among the Greeks.""Well, then," said Athos, "it is agreed.  Planchet and Bazinshall go.  Everything considered, I am not sorry to retainGrimaud; he is accustomed to my ways, and I am particular.Yesterday's affair must have shaken him a little; his voyagewould upset him quite."

    Planchet was sent for, and instructions were given him.  Thematter had been named to him by D'Artagnan, who in the firstplace pointed out the money to him, then the glory, and thenthe danger.

    "I will carry the letter in the lining of my coat," saidPlanchet; "and if I am taken I will swallow it."

    "Well, but then you will not be able to fulfill yourcommission," said D'Artagnan.

    "You will give me a copy this evening, which I shall know byheart tomorrow."

    D'Artagnan looked at his friends, as if to say, "Well, whatdid I tell you?"

    "Now," continued he, addressing Planchet, "you have eightdays to get an interview with Lord de Winter; you have eightdays to return--in all sixteen days.  If, on the sixteenthday after your departure, at eight o'clock in the eveningyou are not here, no money--even if it be but five minutespast eight."

    "Then, monsieur," said Planchet, "you must buy me a watch.""Take this," said Athos, with his usual careless generosity,giving him his own, "and be a good lad.  Remember, if youtalk, if you babble, if you get drunk, you risk yourmaster's head, who has so much confidence in your fidelity,and who answers for you.  But remember, also, that if byyour fault any evil happens to D'Artagnan, I will find you,wherever you may be, for the purpose of ripping up yourbelly."

    "Oh, monsieur!" said Planchet, humiliated by the suspicion,and moreover, terrified at the calm air of the Musketeer."And I," said Porthos, rolling his large eyes, "remember, Iwill skin you alive."

    "Ah, monsieur!"

    "And I," said Aramis, with his soft, melodius voice,"remember that I will roast you at a slow fire, like asavage."

    "Ah, monsieur!"

    Planchet began to weep.  We will not venture to say whetherit was from terror created by the threats or from tendernessat seeing four friends so closely united.

    D'Artagnan took his hand.  "See, Planchet," said he, "thesegentlemen only say this out of affection for me, but atbottom they all like you."

    "Ah, monsieur," said Planchet, "I will succeed or I willconsent to be cut in quarters; and if they do cut me inquarters, be assured that not a morsel of me will speak."It was decided that Planchet should set out the next day, ateight o'clock in the morning, in order, as he had said, thathe might during the night learn the letter by heart.  Hegained just twelve hours by this engagement; he was to beback on the sixteenth day, by eight o'clock in the evening.In the morning, as he was mounting his horse, D'Artagnan,who felt at the bottom of his heart a partiality for theduke, took Planchet aside.

    "Listen," said he to him.  "When you have given the letterto Lord de Winter and he has read it, you will further sayto him:  Watch over his Grace Lord Buckingham, for they wishto assassinate him.  But this, Planchet, is so serious andimportant that I have not informed my friends that I wouldentrust this secret to you; and for a captain's commission Iwould not write it."

    "Be satisfied, monsieur," said Planchet, "you shall see ifconfidence can be placed in me."

    Mounted on an excellent horse, which he was to leave at theend of twenty leagues in order to take the post, Planchetset off at a gallop, his spirits a little depressed by thetriple promise made him by the Musketeers, but otherwise aslight-hearted as possible.

    Bazin set out the next day for Tours, and was allowed eightdays for performing his commission.

    The four friends, during the period of these two absences,had, as may well be supposed, the eye on the watch, the noseto the wind, and the ear on the hark.  Their days werepassed in endeavoring to catch all that was said, inobserving the proceeding of the cardinal, and in looking outfor all the couriers who arrived.  More than once aninvoluntary trembling seized them when called upon for someunexpected service.  They had, besides, to look constantlyto their own proper safety; Milday was a phantom which, whenit had once appeared to people, did not allow them to sleepvery quietly.

    On the morning of the eighth day, Bazin, fresh as ever, andsmiling, according to custom, entered the cabaret of theParpaillot as the four friends were sitting down tobreakfast, saying, as had been agreed upon: "MonsieurAramis, the answer from your cousin."

    The four friends exchanged a joyful glance; half of the workwas done.  It is true, however, that it was the shorter andeasier part.

    Aramis, blushing in spite of himself, took the letter, whichwas in a large, coarse hand and not particular for itsorthography.

    "Good God!" cried he, laughing, "I quite despair of my poorMichon; she will never write like Monsieur de Voiture.""What does you mean by boor Michon?" said the Swiss, who waschatting with the four friends when the letter came."Oh, pardieu, less than nothing," said Aramis; "a charminglittle seamstress, whom I love dearly and from whose hand Irequested a few lines as a sort of keepsake."

    "The duvil!" said the Swiss, "if she is as great a lady asher writing is large, you are a lucky fellow, gomrade!"Aramis read the letter, and passed it to Athos.

    "See what she writes to me, Athos," said he.

    Athos cast a glance over the epistle, and to disperse allthe suspicions that might have been created, read aloud:

    "My cousin, My sister and I are skillful in interpretingdreams, and even entertain great fear of them; but of yoursit may be said, I hope, every dream is an illusion.  Adieu!Take care of yourself, and act so that we may from time totime hear you spoken of.

    "Marie Michon"

    "And what dream does she mean?" asked the dragoon, who hadapproached during the reading.

    "Yez; what's the dream?" said the Swiss.

    "Well, pardieu!" said Aramis, "it was only this:  I had adream, and I related it to her."

    "Yez, yez," said the Swiss; "it's simple enough to dell adream, but I neffer dream."

    "You are very fortunate," said Athos, rising; "I wish Icould say as much!"

    "Neffer," replied the Swiss, enchanted that a man like Athoscould envy him anything.  "Neffer, neffer!"

    D'Artagnan, seeing Athos rise, did likewise, took his arm,and went out.

    Porthos and Aramis remained behind to encounter the jokes ofthe dragoon and the Swiss.

    As to Bazin, he went and lay down on a truss of straw; andas he had more imagination than the Swiss, he dreamed thatAramis, having become pope, adorned his head with acardinal's hat.

    But, as we have said, Bazin had not, by his fortunatereturn, removed more than a part of the uneasiness whichweighed upon the four friends.  The days of expectation arelong, and D'Artagnan, in particular, would have wagered thatthe days were forty-four hours.  He forgot the necessaryslowness of navigation; he exaggerated to himself the powerof Milady.  He credited this woman, who appeared to him theequal of a demon, with agents as supernatural as herself; atthe least noise, he imagined himself about to be arrested,and that Planchet was being brought back to be confrontedwith himself and his friends.  Still further, his confidencein the worthy Picard, at one time so great, diminished dayby day.  This anxiety became so great that it even extendedto Aramis and Porthos.  Athos alone remained unmoved, as ifno danger hovered over him, and as if he breathed hiscustomary atmosphere.

    On the sixteenth day, in particular, these signs were sostrong in D'Artagnan and his two friends that they could notremain quiet in one place, and wandered about like ghosts onthe road by which Planchet was expected.

    "Really," said Athos to them, "you are not men but children,to let a woman terrify you so!  And what does it amount to,after all?  To be imprisoned.  Well, but we should be takenout of prison; Madame Bonacieux was released.  To bedecapitated?  Why, every day in the trenches we gocheerfully to expose ourselves to worse than that--for abullet may break a leg, and I am convinced a surgeon wouldgive us more pain in cutting off a thigh than an executionerin cutting off a head.  Wait quietly, then; in two hours, infour, in six hours at latest, Planchet will be here.  Hepromised to be here, and I have very great faith inPlanchet, who appears to me to be a very good lad.""But if he does not come?" said D'Artagnan.

    "Well, if he does not come, it will be because he has beendelayed, that's all.  He may have fallen from his horse, hemay have cut a caper from the deck; he may have traveled sofast against the wind as to have brought on a violentcatarrh.  Eh, gentlemen, let us reckon upon accidents!  Lifeis a chaplet of little miseries which the philosopher countswith a smile.  Be philosophers, as I am, gentlemen; sit downat the table and let us drink.  Nothing makes the futurelook so bright as surveying it through a glass ofchambertin."

    "That's all very well," replied D'Artagnan; "but I am tiredof fearing when I open a fresh bottle that the wine may comefrom the cellar of Milady."

    "You are very fastidious," said Athos; "such a beautifulwoman!"

    "A woman of mark!" said Porthos, with his loud laugh.Athos started, passed his hand over his brow to remove thedrops of perspiration that burst forth, and rose in his turnwith a nervous movement he could not repress.

    The day, however, passed away; and the evening came onslowly, but finally it came.  The bars were filled withdrinkers.  Athos, who had pocketed his share of the diamond,seldom quit the Parpaillot.  He had found in M. de Busigny,who, by the by, had given them a magnificent dinner, apartner worthy of his company.  They were playing together,as usual, when seven o'clock sounded; the patrol was heardpassing to double the posts.  At half past seven the retreatwas sounded.

    "We are lost," said D'Artagnan, in the ear of Athos."You mean to say we have lost," said Athos, quietly, drawingfour pistoles from his pocket and throwing them upon thetable.  "Come, gentlemen," said he, "they are beating thetattoo.  Let us to bed!"

    And Athos went out of the Parpaillot, followed byD'Artagnan.  Aramis came behind, giving his arm to Porthos.Aramis mumbled verses to himself, and Porthos from time totime pulled a hair or two from his mustache, in sign ofdespair.

    But all at once a shadow appeared in the darkness theoutline of which was familiar to D'Artagnan, and a well-known voice said, "Monsieur, I have brought your cloak; itis chilly this evening."

    "Planchet!" cried D'Artagnan, beside himself with joy."Planchet!" repeated Aramis and Porthos.

    "Well, yes, Planchet, to be sure," said Athos, "what isthere so astonishing in that?  He promised to be back byeight o'clock, and eight is striking.  Bravo, Planchet, youare a lad of your word, and if ever you leave your master, Iwill promise you a place in my service."

    "Oh, no, never," said Planchet, "I will never leave Monsieurd'Artagnan."

    At the same time D'Artagnan felt that Planchet slipped anote into his hand.

    D'Artagnan felt a strong inclination to embrace Planchet ashe had embraced him on his departure; but he feared lestthis mark of affection, bestowed upon his lackey in the openstreet, might appear extraordinary to passers-by, and herestrained himself.

    "I have the note," said he to Athos and to his friends."That's well," said Athos, "let us go home and read it."The note burned the hand of D'Artagnan.  He wished to hastentheir steps; but Athos took his arm and passed it under hisown, and the young man was forced to regulate his pace bythat of his friend.

    At length they reached the tent, lit a lamp, and whilePlanchet stood at the entrance that the four friends mightnot be surprised, D'Artagnan, with a trembling hand, brokethe seal and opened the so anxiously expected letter.It contained half a line, in a hand perfectly British, andwith a conciseness as perfectly Spartan:

    Thank you; be easy.

    D'Artagnan translated this for the others.

    Athos took the letter from the hands of D'Artagnan,approached the lamp, set fire to the paper, and did not letgo till it was reduced to a cinder.

    Then, calling Planchet, he said, "Now, my lad, you may claimyour seven hundred livres, but you did not run much riskwith such a note as that."

    "I am not to blame for having tried every means to compressit," said Planchet.

    "Well!" cried D'Artagnan, "tell us all about it.""Dame, that's a long job, monsieur."

    "You are right, Planchet," said Athos; "besides, the tattoohas been sounded, and we should be observed if we kept alight burning much longer than the others."

    "So be it," said D'Artagnan.  "Go to bed, Planchet, andsleep soundly."

    "My faith, monsieur! that will be the first time I have doneso for sixteen days."

    "And me, too!" said D'Artagnan.

    "And me, too!" said Porthos.

    "And me, too!" said Aramis.

    "Well, if you will have the truth, and me, too!" said Athos.

    49  FATALITY

    Meantime Milady, drunk with passion, roaring on the deck like alioness that has been embarked, had been tempted to throw herselfinto the sea that she might regain the coast, for she could notget rid of the thought that she had been insulted by D'Artagnan,threatened by Athos, and that she had quit France without beingrevenged on them.  This idea soon became so insupportable to herthat at the risk of whatever terrible consequences might resultto herself from it, she implored the captain to put her on shore;but the captain, eager to escape from his false position-placedbetween French and English cruisers, like the bat between themice and the birds--was in great haste to regain England, andpositively refused to obey what he took for a woman's caprice,promising his passenger, who had been particularly recommended tohim by the cardinal, to land her, if the sea and the Frenchpermitted him, at one of the ports of Brittany, either at Lorientor Brest.  But the wind was contrary, the sea bad; they tackedand kept offshore.  Nine days after leaving the Charente, palewith fatigue and vexation, Milady saw only the blue coasts ofFinisterre appear.

    She calculated that to cross this corner of France and return tothe cardinal it would take her at least three days.  Add anotherday for landing, and that would make four.  Add these four to thenine others, that would be thirteen days lost--thirteen days,during which so many important events might pass in London.  Shereflected likewise that the cardinal would be furious at herreturn, and consequently would be more disposed to listen to thecomplaints brought against her than to the accusations shebrought against others.

    She allowed the vessel to pass Lorient and Brest withoutrepeating her request to the captain, who, on his part, took carenot to remind her of it.  Milady therefore continued her voyage,and on the very day that Planchet embarked at Portsmouth forFrance, the messenger of his Eminence entered the port intriumph.

    All the city was agitated by an extraordinary movement.  Fourlarge vessels, recently built, had just been launched.  At theend of the jetty, his clothes richly laced with gold, glittering,as was customary with him, with diamonds and precious stones, hishat ornamented with a white feather which drooped upon hisshoulder, Buckingham was seen surrounded by a staff almost asbrilliant as himself.

    It was one of those rare and beautiful days in winter whenEngland remembers that there is a sun.  The star of day, pale butnevertheless still splendid, was setting in the horizon,glorifying at once the heavens and the sea with bands of fire,and casting upon the towers and the old houses of the city a lastray of gold which made the windows sparkle like the reflection ofa conflagration.  Breathing that sea breeze, so much moreinvigorating and balsamic as the land is approached,contemplating all the power of those preparations she wascommissioned to destroy, all the power of that army which she wasto combat alone--she, a woman with a few bags of gold--Miladycompared herself mentally to Judith, the terrible Jewess, whenshe penetrated the camp of the Assyrians and beheld the enormousmass of chariots, horses, men, and arms, which a gesture of herhand was to dissipate like a cloud of smoke.

    They entered the roadstead; but as they drew near in order tocast anchor, a little cutter, looking like a coastguardformidably armed, approached the merchant vessel and dropped intothe sea a boat which directed its course to the ladder.  Thisboat contained an officer, a mate, and eight rowers.  The officeralone went on board, where he was received with all the deferenceinspired by the uniform.

    The officer conversed a few instants with the captain, gave himseveral papers, of which he was the bearer, to read, and upon theorder of the merchant captain the whole crew of the vessel, bothpassengers and sailors, were called upon deck.

    When this species of summons was made the officer inquired aloudthe point of the brig's departure, its route, its landings; andto all these questions the captain replied without difficulty andwithout hesitation.  Then the officer began to pass in review allthe people, one after the other, and stopping when he came toMilady, surveyed her very closely, but without addressing asingle word to her.

    He then returned to the captain, said a few words to him, and asif from that moment the vessel was under his command, he ordereda maneuver which the crew executed immediately.  Then the vesselresumed its course, still escorted by the little cutter, whichsailed side by side with it, menacing it with the mouths of itssix cannon.  The boat followed in the wake of the ship, a specknear the enormous mass.

    During the examination of Milady by the officer, as may well beimagined, Milady on her part was not less scrutinizing in herglances.  But however great was the power of this woman with eyesof flame in reading the hearts of those whose secrets she wishedto divine, she met this time with a countenance of suchimpassivity that no discovery followed her investigation.  Theofficer who had stopped in front of her and studied her with somuch care might have been twenty-five or twenty-six years of age.He was of pale complexion, with clear blue eyes, rather deeplyset; his mouth, fine and well cut, remained motionless in itscorrect lines; his chin, strongly marked, denoted that strengthof will which in the ordinary Britannic type denotes mostlynothing but obstinacy; a brow a little receding, as is proper forpoets, enthusiasts, and soldiers, was scarcely shaded by shortthin hair which, like the beard which covered the lower part ofhis face, was of a beautiful deep chestnut color.When they entered the port, it was already night.  The fogincreased the darkness, and formed round the sternlights andlanterns of the jetty a circle like that which surrounds the moonwhen the weather threatens to become rainy.  The air theybreathed was heavy, damp, and cold.

    Milady, that woman so courageous and firm, shivered in spite ofherself.

    The officer desired to have Milady's packages pointed out to him,and ordered them to be placed in the boat.  When this operationwas complete, he invited her to descend by offering her his hand.Milady looked at this man, and hesitated.  "Who are you, sir,"asked she, "who has the kindness to trouble yourself soparticularly on my account?"

    "You may perceive, madame, by my uniform, that I am an officer inthe English navy," replied the young man.

    "But is it the custom for the officers in the English navy toplace themselves at the service of their female compatriots whenthey land in a port of Great Britain, and carry their gallantryso far as to conduct them ashore?"

    "Yes, madame, it is the custom, not from gallantry but prudence,that in time of war foreigners should be conducted to particularhotels, in order that they may remain under the eye of thegovernment until full information can be obtained about them."These words were pronounced with the most exact politeness andthe most perfect calmness.  Nevertheless, they had not the powerof convincing Milady.

    "But I am not a foreigner, sir," said she, with an accent as pureas ever was heard between Portsmouth and Manchester; "my name isLady Clarik, and this measure--"

    "This measure is general, madame; and you will seek in vain toevade it."

    "I will follow you, then, sir."

    Accepting the hand of the officer, she began the descent of theladder, at the foot of which the boat waited.  The officerfollowed her.  A large cloak was spread at the stern; the officerrequested her to sit down upon this cloak, and placed himselfbeside her.

    "Row!" said he to the sailors.

    The eight oars fell at once into the sea, making but a singlesound, giving but a single stroke, and the boat seemed to flyover the surface of the water.

    In five minutes they gained the land.

    The officer leaped to the pier, and offered his hand to Milady.A carriage was in waiting.

    "Is this carriage for us?" asked Milady.

    "Yes, madame," replied the officer.

    "The hotel, then, is far away?"

    "At the other end of the town."

    "Very well," said Milady; and she resolutely entered thecarriage.

    The officer saw that the baggage was fastened carefully behindthe carriage; and this operation ended, he took his place besideMilady, and shut the door.

    Immediately, without any order being given or his place ofdestination indicated, the coachman set off at a rapid pace, andplunged into the streets of the city.

    So strange a reception naturally gave Milady ample matter forreflection; so seeing that the young officer did not seem at alldisposed for conversation, she reclined in her corner of thecarriage, and one after the other passed in review all thesurmises which presented themselves to her mind.

    At the end of a quarter of an hour, however, surprised at thelength of the journey, she leaned forward toward the door to seewhither she was being conducted.  Houses were no longer to beseen; trees appeared in the darkness like great black phantomschasing one another.  Milady shuddered.

    "But we are no longer in the city, sir," said she.The young officer preserved silence.

    "I beg you to understand, sir, I will go no farther unless youtell me whither you are taking me."

    This threat brought no reply.

    "Oh, this is too much," cried Milady.  "Help! help!"No voice replied to hers; the carriage continued to roll on withrapidity; the officer seemed a statue.

    Milady looked at the officer with one of those terribleexpressions peculiar to her countenance, and which so rarelyfailed of their effect; anger made her eyes flash in thedarkness.

    The young man remained immovable.

    Milady tried to open the door in order to throw herself out."Take care, madame," said the young man, coolly, "you will killyourself in jumping."

    Milady reseated herself, foaming.  The officer leaned forward,looked at her in his turn, and appeared surprised to see thatface, just before so beautiful, distorted with passion and almosthideous.  The artful creature at once comprehended that she wasinjuring herself by allowing him thus to read her soul; shecollected her features, and in a complaining voice said:  "In thename of heaven, sir, tell me if it is to you, if it is to yourgovernment, if it is to an enemy I am to attribute the violencethat is done me?"

    "No violence will be offered to you, madame, and what happens toyou is the result of a very simple measure which we are obligedto adopt with all who land in England."

    "Then you don't know me, sir?"

    "It is the first time I have had the honor of seeing you.""And on your honor, you have no cause of hatred against me?""None, I swear to you."

    There was so much serenity, coolness, mildness even, in the voiceof the young man, that Milady felt reassured.

    At length after a journey of nearly an hour, the carriage stoppedbefore an iron gate, which closed an avenue leading to a castlesevere in form, massive, and isolated.  Then, as the wheelsrolled over a fine gravel, Milady could hear a vast roaring,which she at once recognized as the noise of the sea dashingagainst some steep cliff.

    The carriage passed under two arched gateways, and at lengthstopped in a court large, dark, and square.  Almost immediatelythe door of the carriage was opened, the young man sprang lightlyout and presented his hand to Milady, who leaned upon it, and inher turn alighted with tolerable calmness.

    "Still, then, I am a prisoner," said Milady, looking around her,and bringing back her eyes with a most gracious smile to theyoung officer; "but I feel assured it will not be for long,"added she.  "My own conscience and your politeness, sir, are theguarantees of that."

    However flattering this compliment, the officer made no reply;but drawing from his belt a little silver whistle, such asboatswains use in ships of war, he whistled three times, withthree different modulations.  Immediately several men appeared,who unharnessed the smoking horses, and put the carriage into acoach house.

    Then the officer, with the same calm politeness, invited hisprisoner to enter the house.  She, with a still-smilingcountenance, took his arm, and passed with him under a low archeddoor, which by a vaulted passage, lighted only at the fartherend, led to a stone staircase around an angle of stone.  Theythen came to a massive door, which after the introduction intothe lock of a key which the young man carried with him, turnedheavily upon its hinges, and disclosed the chamber destined forMilady.

    With a single glance the prisoner took in the apartment in itsminutest details.  It was a chamber whose furniture was at onceappropriate for a prisoner or a free man; and yet bars at thewindows and outside bolts at the door decided the question infavor of the prison.

    In an instant all the strength of mind of this creature, thoughdrawn from the most vigorous sources, abandoned her; she sankinto a large easy chair, with her arms crossed, her head lowered,and expecting every instant to see a judge enter to interrogateher.

    But no one entered except two or three marines, who brought hertrunks and packages, deposited them in a corner, and retiredwithout speaking.

    The officer superintended all these details with the samecalmness Milady had constantly seen in him, never pronouncing aword himself, and making himself obeyed by a gesture of his handor a sound of his whistle.

    It might have been said that between this man and his inferiorsspoken language did not exist, or had become useless.At length Milady could hold out no longer; she broke the silence."In the name of heaven, sir," cried she, "what means all that ispassing?  Put an end to my doubts; I have courage enough for anydanger I can foresee, for every misfortune which I understand.Where am I, and why am I here?  If I am free, why these bars andthese doors?  If I am a prisoner, what crime have I committed?""You are here in the apartment destined for you, madame.  Ireceived orders to go and take charge of you on the sea, and toconduct you to this castle.  This order I believe I haveaccomplished with all the exactness of a soldier, but also withthe courtesy of a gentleman.  There terminates, at least to thepresent moment, the duty I had to fulfill toward you; the restconcerns another person."

    "And who is that other person?" asked Milady, warmly.  "Can younot tell me his name?"

    At the moment a great jingling of spurs was heard on the stairs.Some voices passed and faded away, and the sound of a singlefootstep approached the door.

    "That person is here, madame," said the officer, leaving theentrance open, and drawing himself up in an attitude of respect.At the same time the door opened; a man appeared on thethreshold.  He was without a hat, carried a sword, and flourisheda handkerchief in his hand.

    Milady thought she recognized this shadow in the gloom; shesupported herself with one hand upon the arm of the chair, andadvanced her head as if to meet a certainty.

    The stranger advanced slowly, and as he advanced, after enteringinto the circle of light projected by the lamp, Miladyinvoluntarily drew back.

    Then when she had no longer any doubt, she cried, in a state ofstupor, "What, my brother, is it you?"

    "Yes, fair lady!" replied Lord de Winter, making a bow, halfcourteous, half ironical; "it is I, myself."

    "But this castle, then?"

    "Is mine."

    "This chamber?"

    "Is yours."

    "I am, then, your prisoner?"

    "Nearly so."

    "But this is a frightful abuse of power!"

    "No high-sounding words!  Let us sit down and chat quietly, asbrother and sister ought to do."

    Then, turning toward the door, and seeing that the young officerwas waiting for his last orders, he said.  "All is well, I thankyou; now leave us alone, Mr. Felton."

    50  CHAT BETWEEN BROTHER AND SISTER

    During the time which Lord de Winter took to shut the door, closea shutter, and draw a chair near to his sister-in-law's fauteuil,Milady, anxiously thoughtful, plunged her glance into the depthsof possibility, and discovered all the plan, of which she couldnot even obtain a glance as long as she was ignorant into whosehands she had fallen.  She knew her brother-in-law to be a worthygentleman, a bold hunter, an intrepid player, enterprising withwomen, but by no means remarkable for his skill in intrigues.How had he discovered her arrival, and caused her to be seized?Why did he detain her?

    Athos had dropped some words which proved that the conversationshe had with the cardinal had fallen into outside ears; but shecould not suppose that he had dug a countermine so promptly andso boldly.  She rather feared that her preceding operations inEngland might have been discovered.  Buckingham might haveguessed that it was she who had cut off the two studs, and avengehimself for that little treachery; but Buckingham was incapableof going to any excess against a woman, particularly if thatwoman was supposed to have acted from a feeling of jealousy.This supposition appeared to her most reasonable.  It seemed toher that they wanted to revenge the past, and not to anticipatethe future.  At all events, she congratulated herself upon havingfallen into the hands of her brother-in-law, with whom shereckoned she could deal very easily, rather than into the handsof an acknowledged and intelligent enemy.

    "Yes, let us chat, brother," said she, with a kind ofcheerfulness, decided as she was to draw from the conversation,in spite of all the dissimulation Lord de Winter could bring, therevelations of which she stood in need to regulate her futureconduct.

    "You have, then, decided to come to England again," said Lord deWinter, "in spite of the resolutions you so often expressed inParis never to set your feet on British ground?"

    Milady replied to this question by another question.  "To beginwith, tell me," said she, "how have you watched me so closely asto be aware beforehand not only of my arrival, but even of theday, the hour, and the port at which I should arrive?"Lord de Winter adopted the same tactics as Milady, thinking thatas his sister-in-law employed them they must be the best."But tell me, my dear sister," replied he, "what makes you cometo England?"

    "I come to see you," replied Milady, without knowing how much sheaggravated by this reply the suspicions to which D'Artagnan'sletter had given birth in the mind of her brother-in-law, andonly desiring to gain the good will of her auditor by afalsehood.

    "Ah, to see me?" said De Winter, cunningly.

    "To be sure, to see you.  What is there astonishing in that?""And you had no other object in coming to England but to see me?""No."

    "So it was for me alone you have taken the trouble to cross theChannel?"

    "For you alone."

    "The deuce!  What tenderness, my sister!"

    "But am I not your nearest relative?" demanded Milady, with atone of the most touching ingenuousness.

    "And my only heir, are you not?" said Lord de Winter in his turn,fixing his eyes on those of Milady.

    Whatever command she had over herself, Milady could not helpstarting; and as in pronouncing the last words Lord de Winterplaced his hand upon the arm of his sister, this start did notescape him.

    In fact, the blow was direct and severe.  The first idea thatoccurred to Milady's mind was that she had been betrayed byKitty, and that she had recounted to the baron the selfishaversion toward himself of which she had imprudently allowed somemarks to escape before her servant.  She also recollected thefurious and imprudent attack she had made upon D'Artagnan when hespared the life of her brother.

    "I do not understand, my Lord," said she, in order to gain timeand make her adversary speak out.  "What do you mean to say?  Isthere any secret meaning concealed beneath your words?""Oh, my God, no!" said Lord de Winter, with apparent good nature."You wish to see me, and you come to England.  I learn thisdesire, or rather I suspect that you feel it; and in order tospare you all the annoyances of a nocturnal arrival in a port andall the fatigues of landing, I send one of my officers to meetyou, I place a carriage at his orders, and he brings you hitherto this castle, of which I am governor, whither I come every day,and where, in order to satisfy our mutual desire of seeing eachother, I have prepared you a chamber.  What is there moreastonishing in all that I have said to you than in what you havetold me?"

    "No; what I think astonishing is that you should expect mycoming."

    "And yet that is the most simple thing in the world, my dearsister.  Have you not observed that the captain of your littlevessel, on entering the roadstead, sent forward, in order toobtain permission to enter the port, a little boat bearing hislogbook and the register of his voyagers?  I am commandant of theport.  They brought me that book.  I recognized your name in it.My heart told me what your mouth has just confirmed--that is tosay, with what view you have exposed yourself to the dangers of asea so perilous, or at least so troublesome at this moment--and Isent my cutter to meet you.  You know the rest."

    Milady knew that Lord de Winter lied, and she was the morealarmed.

    "My brother," continued she, "was not that my Lord Buckinghamwhom I saw on the jetty this evening as we arrived?""Himself.  Ah, I can understand how the sight of him struck you,"replied Lord de Winter.  "You came from a country where he mustbe very much talked of, and I know that his armaments againstFrance greatly engage the attention of your friend the cardinal.""My friend the cardinal!" cried Milady, seeing that on this pointas on the other Lord de Winter seemed well instructed."Is he not your friend?" replied the baron, negligently.  "Ah,pardon!  I thought so; but we will return to my Lord Dukepresently.  Let us not depart from the sentimental turn ourconversation had taken.  You came, you say, to see me?""Yes."

    "Well, I reply that you shall be served to the height of yourwishes, and that we shall see each other every day.""Am I, then, to remain here eternally?" demanded Milady, with acertain terror.

    "Do you find yourself badly lodged, sister?  Demand anything youwant, and I will hasten to have you furnished with it.""But I have neither my women nor my servants."

    "You shall have all, madame.  Tell me on what footing yourhousehold was established by your first husband, and although Iam only your brother-in-law, I will arrange one similar.""My first husband!" cried Milady, looking at Lord de Winter witheyes almost starting from their sockets.

    "Yes, your French husband.  I don't speak of my brother.  If youhave forgotten, as he is still living, I can write to him and hewill send me information on the subject."

    A cold sweat burst from the brow of Milady.

    "You jest!" said she, in a hollow voice.

    "Do I look so?" asked the baron, rising and going a stepbackward.

    "Or rather you insult me," continued she, pressing with herstiffened hands the two arms of her easy chair, and raisingherself upon her wrists.

    "I insult you!" said Lord de Winter, with contempt.  "In truth,madame, do you think that can be possible?"

    "Indeed, sir," said Milady, "you must be either drunk or mad.Leave the room, and send me a woman."

    "Women are very indiscreet, my sister.  Cannot I serve you as awaiting maid?  By that means all our secrets will remain in thefamily."

    "Insolent!" cried Milady; and as if acted upon by a spring, shebounded toward the baron, who awaited her attack with his armscrossed, but nevertheless with one hand on the hilt of his sword."Come!" said he. "I know you are accustomed to assassinatepeople; but I warn you I shall defend myself, even against you.""You are right," said Milady.  "You have all the appearance ofbeing cowardly enough to lift your hand against a woman.""Perhaps so; and I have an excuse, for mine would not be thefirst hand of a man that has been placed upon you, I imagine."And the baron pointed, with a slow and accusing gesture, to theleft shoulder of Milady, which he almost touched with his finger.Milady uttered a deep, inward shriek, and retreated to a cornerof the room like a panther which crouches for a spring."Oh, growl as much as you please," cried Lord de Winter, "butdon't try to bite, for I warn you that it would be to yourdisadvantage.  There are here no procurators who regulatesuccessions beforehand.  There is no knight-errant to come andseek a quarrel with me on account of the fair lady I detain aprisoner; but I have judges quite ready who will quickly disposeof a woman so shameless as to glide, a bigamist, into the bed ofLord de Winter, my brother.  And these judges, I warn you, willsoon send you to an executioner who will make both your shouldersalike."

    The eyes of Milady darted such flashes that although he was a manand armed before an unarmed woman, he felt the chill of fearglide through his whole frame.  However, he continued all thesame, but with increasing warmth:  "Yes, I can very wellunderstand that after having inherited the fortune of my brotherit would be very agreeable to you to be my heir likewise; butknow beforehand, if you kill me or cause me to be killed, myprecautions are taken.  Not a penny of what I possess will passinto your hands.  Were you not already rich enough--you whopossess nearly a million?  And could you not stop your fatalcareer, if you did not do evil for the infinite and supreme joyof doing it?  Oh, be assured, if the memory of my brother werenot sacred to me, you should rot in a state dungeon or satisfythe curiosity of sailors at Tyburn.  I will be silent, but youmust endure your captivity quietly.  In fifteen or twenty days Ishall set out for La Rochelle with the army; but on the eve of mydeparture a vessel which I shall see depart will take you henceand convey you to our colonies in the south.  And be assured thatyou shall be accompanied by one who will blow your brains out atthe first attempt you make to return to England or theContinent."

    Milady listened with an attention that dilated her inflamed eyes."Yes, at present," continued Lord de Winter, "you will remain inthis castle.  The walls are thick, the doors strong, and the barssolid; besides, your window opens immediately over the sea.  Themen of my crew, who are devoted to me for life and death, mountguard around this apartment, and watch all the passages that leadto the courtyard.  Even if you gained the yard, there would stillbe three iron gates for you to pass.  The order is positive.  Astep, a gesture, a word, on your part, denoting an effort toescape, and you are to be fired upon.  If they kill you, Englishjustice will be under an obligation to me for having saved ittrouble.  Ah! I see your features regain their calmness, yourcountenance recovers its assurance.  You are saying to yourself:'Fifteen days, twenty days?  Bah!  I have an inventive mind;before that is expired some idea will occur to me.  I have aninfernal spirit.  I shall meet with a victim.  Before fifteendays are gone by I shall be away from here.'  Ah, try it!"Milady, finding her thoughts betrayed, dug her nails into herflesh to subdue every emotion that might give to her face anyexpression except agony.

    Lord de Winter continued:  "The officer who commands here in myabsence you have already seen, and therefore know him.  He knowshow, as you must have observed, to obey an order--for you didnot, I am sure, come from Portsmouth hither without endeavoringto make him speak.  What do you say of him?  Could a statue ofmarble have been more impassive and more mute?  You have alreadytried the power of your seductions upon many men, andunfortunately you have always succeeded; but I give you leave totry them upon this one.  PARDIEU! if you succeed with him, Ipronounce you the demon himself."

    He went toward the door and opened it hastily.

    "Call Mr. Felton," said he. "Wait a minute longer, and I willintroduce him to you."

    There followed between these two personages a strange silence,during which the sound of a slow and regular step was heardapproaching.  Shortly a human form appeared in the shade of thecorridor, and the young lieutenant, with whom we are alreadyacquainted, stopped at the threshold to receive the orders of thebaron.

    "Come in, my dear John," said Lord de Winter, "come in, and shutthe door."

    The young officer entered.

    "Now," said the baron, "look at this woman.  She is young; she isbeautiful; she possesses all earthly seductions.  Well, she is amonster, who, at twenty-five years of age, has been guilty of asmany crimes as you could read of in a year in the archives of ourtribunals.  Her voice prejudices her hearers in her favor; herbeauty serves as a bait to her victims; her body even pays whatshe promises--I must do her that justice.  She will try to seduceyou, perhaps she will try to kill you.  I have extricated youfrom misery, Felton; I have caused you to be named lieutenant; Ionce saved your life, you know on what occasion.  I am for younot only a protector, but a friend; not only a benefactor, but afather.  This woman has come back again into England for thepurpose of conspiring against my life.  I hold this serpent in myhands.  Well, I call you, and say to you:  Friend Felton, John,my child, guard me, and more particularly guard yourself, againstthis woman.  Swear, by your hopes of salvation, to keep hersafely for the chastisement she has merited.  John Felton, Itrust your word!  John Felton, I put faith in your loyalty!""My Lord," said the young officer, summoning to his mildcountenance all the hatred he could find in his heart, "my Lord,I swear all shall be done as you desire."

    Milady received this look like a resigned victim; it wasimpossible to imagine a more submissive or a more mild expressionthan that which prevailed on her beautiful countenance.  Lord deWinter himself could scarcely recognize the tigress who, a minutebefore, prepared apparently for a fight.

    "She is not to leave this chamber, understand, John," continuedthe baron.  "She is to correspond with nobody; she is to speak tono one but you--if you will do her the honor to address a word toher."

    "That is sufficient, my Lord!  I have sworn."

    "And now, madame, try to make your peace with God, for you arejudged by men!"

    Milady let her head sink, as if crushed by this sentence.  Lordde Winter went out, making a sign to Felton, who followed him,shutting the door after him.

    One instant after, the heavy step of a marine who served assentinel was heard in the corridor--his ax in his girdle and hismusket on his shoulder.

    Milady remained for some minutes in the same position, for shethought they might perhaps be examining her through the keyhole;she then slowly raised her head, which had resumed its formidableexpression of menace and defiance, ran to the door to listen,looked out of her window, and returning to bury herself again inher large armchair, she reflected.

    51  OFFICER

    Meanwhile, the cardinal looked anxiously for news from England;but no news arrived that was not annoying and threatening.Although La Rochelle was invested, however certain success mightappear--thanks to the precautions taken, and above all to thedyke, which prevented the entrance of any vessel into thebesieged city--the blockade might last a long time yet.  This wasa great affront to the king's army, and a great inconvenience tothe cardinal, who had no longer, it is true, to embroil LouisXIII with Anne of Austria--for that affair was over--but he hadto adjust matters for M. de Bassompierre, who was embroiled withthe Duc d'Angouleme.

    As to Monsieur, who had begun the siege, he left to the cardinalthe task of finishing it.

    The city, notwithstanding the incredible perseverance of itsmayor, had attempted a sort of mutiny for a surrender; the mayorhad hanged the mutineers.  This execution quieted the ill-disposed, who resolved to allow themselves to die of hunger--thisdeath always appearing to them more slow and less sure thanstrangulation.

    On their side, from time to time, the besiegers took themessengers which the Rochellais sent to Buckingham, or the spieswhich Buckingham sent to the Rochellais.  In one case or theother, the trial was soon over.  The cardinal pronounced thesingle word, "Hanged!"  The king was invited to come and see thehanging.  He came languidly, placing himself in a good situationto see all the details.  This amused him sometimes a little, andmade him endure the siege with patience; but it did not preventhis getting very tired, or from talking at every moment ofreturning to Paris--so that if the messengers and the spies hadfailed, his Eminence, notwithstanding all his inventiveness,would have found himself much embarrassed.

    Nevertheless, time passed on, and the Rochellais did notsurrender.  The last spy that was taken was the bearer of aletter.  This letter told Buckingham that the city was at anextremity; but instead of adding, "If your succor does not arrivewithin fifteen days, we will surrender," it added, quite simply,"If your succor comes not within fifteen days, we shall all bedead with hunger when it comes."

    The Rochellais, then, had no hope but in Buckingham.  Buckinghamwas their Messiah.  It was evident that if they one day learnedpositively that they must not count on Buckingham, their couragewould fail with their hope.

    The cardinal looked, then, with great impatience for the newsfrom England which would announce to him that Buckingham wouldnot come.

    The question of carrying the city by assault, though oftendebated in the council of the king, had been always rejected.  Inthe first place, La Rochelle appeared impregnable.  Then thecardinal, whatever he said, very well knew that the horror ofbloodshed in this encounter, in which Frenchman would combatagainst Frenchman, was a retrograde movement of sixty yearsimpressed upon his policy; and the cardinal was at that periodwhat we now call a man of progress.  In fact, the sack of LaRochelle, and the assassination of three of four thousandHuguenots who allowed themselves to be killed, would resemble tooclosely, in 1628, the massacre of St. Bartholomew in 1572; andthen, above all this, this extreme measure, which was not at allrepugnant to the king, good Catholic as he was, always fellbefore this argument of the besieging generals--La Rochelle isimpregnable except to famine.

    The cardinal could not drive from his mind the fear heentertained of his terrible emissary--for he comprehended thestrange qualities of this woman, sometimes a serpent, sometimes alion.  Had she betrayed him?  Was she dead?  He knew her wellenough in all cases to know that, whether acting for or againsthim, as a friend or an enemy, she would not remain motionlesswithout great impediments; but whence did these impedimentsarise?  That was what he could not know.

    And yet he reckoned, and with reason, on Milady.  He had divinedin the past of this woman terrible things which his red mantlealone could cover; and he felt, from one cause or another, thatthis woman was his own, as she could look to no other but himselffor a support superior to the danger which threatened her.He resolved, then, to carry on the war alone, and to look for nosuccess foreign to himself, but as we look for a fortunatechance.  He continued to press the raising of the famous dykewhich was to starve La Rochelle.  Meanwhile, he cast his eyesover that unfortunate city, which contained so much deep miseryand so many heroic virtues, and recalling the saying of Louis XI,his political predecessor, as he himself was the predecessor ofRobespierre, he repeated this maxim of Tristan's gossip:  "Dividein order to reign."

    Henry IV, when besieging Paris, had loaves and provisions thrownover the walls.  The cardinal had little notes thrown over inwhich he represented to the Rochellais how unjust, selfish, andbarbarous was the conduct of their leaders.  These leaders hadcorn in abundance, and would not let them partake of it; theyadopted as a maxim--for they, too, had maxims--that it was ofvery little consequence that women, children, and old men shoulddie, so long as the men who were to defend the walls remainedstrong and healthy.  Up to that time, whether from devotedness orfrom want of power to act against it, this maxim, without beinggenerally adopted, nevertheless passed from theory into practice;but the notes did it injury.  The notes reminded the men that thechildren, women, and old men whom they allowed to die were theirsons, their wives, and their fathers, and that it would be morejust for everyone to be reduced to the common misery, in orderthat equal conditions should give birth to unanimous resolutions.These notes had all the effect that he who wrote them couldexpect, in that they induced a great number of the inhabitants toopen private negotiations with the royal army.

    But at the moment when the cardinal saw his means alreadyfructify, and applauded himself for having put it in action, aninhabitant of La Rochelle who had contrived to pass the royallines--God knows how, such was the watchfulness of Bassompierre,Schomberg, and the Duc d'Angouleme, themselves watched over bythe cardinal--an inhabitant of La Rochelle, we say, entered thecity, coming from Portsmouth, and saying that he had seen amagnificent fleet ready to sail within eight days.  Stillfurther, Buckingham announced to the mayor that at length thegreat league was about to declare itself against France, and thatthe kingdom would be at once invaded by the English, Imperial,and Spanish armies.  This letter was read publicly in all partsof the city.  Copies were put up at the corners of the streets;and even they who had begun to open negotiations interruptedthem, being resolved to await the succor so pompously announced.This unexpected circumstance brought back Richelieu's formeranxiety, and forced him in spite of himself once more to turn hiseyes to the other side of the sea.

    During this time, exempt from the anxiety of its only and truechief, the royal army led a joyous life, neither provisions normoney being wanting in the camp.  All the corps rivaled oneanother in audacity and gaiety.  To take spies and hang them, tomake hazardous expeditions upon the dyke or the sea, to imaginewild plans, and to execute them coolly--such were the pastimeswhich made the army find these days short which were not only solong to the Rochellais, a prey to famine and anxiety, but even tothe cardinal, who blockaded them so closely.

    Sometimes when the cardinal, always on horseback, like the lowestGENDARME of the army, cast a pensive glance over those works, soslowly keeping pace with his wishes, which the engineers, broughtfrom all the corners of France, were executing under his orders,if he met a Musketeer of the company of Treville, he drew nearand looked at him in a peculiar manner, and not recognizing inhim one of our four companions, he turned his penetrating lookand profound thoughts in another direction.

    One day when oppressed with a mortal weariness of mind, withouthope in the negotiations with the city; without news fromEngland, the cardinal went out, without any other aim than to beout of doors, and accompanied only by Cahusac and La Houdiniere,strolled along the beach.  Mingling the immensity of his dreamswith the immensity of the ocean, he came, his horse going at afoot's pace, to a hill from the top of which he perceived behinda hedge, reclining on the sand and catching in its passage one ofthose rays of the sun so rare at this period of the year, sevenmen surrounded by empty bottles.  Four of these men were ourMusketeers, preparing to listen to a letter one of them had justreceived.  This letter was so important that it made them forsaketheir cards and their dice on the drumhead.

    The other three were occupied in opening an enormous flagon ofCollicure wine; these were the lackeys of these gentlemen.The cardinal was, as we have said, in very low spirits; andnothing when he was in that state of mind increased hisdepression so much as gaiety in others.  Besides, he had anotherstrange fancy, which was always to believe that the causes of hissadness created the gaiety of others.  Making a sign to LaHoudiniere and Cahusac to stop, he alighted from his horse, andwent toward these suspected merry companions, hoping, by means ofthe sand which deadened the sound of his steps and of the hedgewhich concealed his approach, to catch some words of thisconversation which appeared so interesting.  At ten paces fromthe hedge he recognized the talkative Gascon; and as he hadalready perceived that these men were Musketeers, he did notdoubt that the three others were those called the Inseparables;that is to say, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.

    It may be supposed that his desire to hear the conversation wasaugmented by this discovery.  His eyes took a strange expression,and with the step of a tiger-cat he advanced toward the hedge;but he had not been able to catch more than a few vague syllableswithout any positive sense, when a sonorous and short cry madehim start, and attracted the attention of the Musketeers."Officer!" cried Grimaud.

    "You are speaking, you scoundrel!" said Athos, rising upon hiselbow, and transfixing Grimaud with his flaming look.Grimaud therefore added nothing to his speech, but contentedhimself with pointing his index finger in the direction of thehedge, announcing by this gesture the cardinal and his escort.With a single bound the Musketeers were on their feet, andsaluted with respect.

    The cardinal seemed furious.

    "It appears that Messieurs the Musketeers keep guard," said he."Are the English expected by land, or do the Musketeers considerthemselves superior officers?"

    "Monseigneur," replied Athos, for amid the general fright healone had preserved the noble calmness and coolness that neverforsook him, "Monseigneur, the Musketeers, when they are not onduty, or when their duty is over, drink and play at dice, andthey are certainly superior officers to their lackeys.""Lackeys?" grumbled the cardinal.  "Lackeys who have the order towarn their masters when anyone passes are not lackeys, they aresentinels."

    "Your Eminence may perceive that if we had not taken thisprecaution, we should have been exposed to allowing you to passwithout presenting you our respects or offering you our thanksfor the favor you have done us in uniting us.  D'Artagnan,"continued Athos, "you, who but lately were so anxious for such anopportunity for expressing your gratitude to Monseigneur, here itis; avail yourself of it."

    These words were pronounced with that imperturbable phlegm whichdistinguished Athos in the hour of danger, and with thatexcessive politeness which made of him at certain moments a kingmore majestic than kings by birth.

    D'Artagnan came forward and stammered out a few words ofgratitude which soon expired under the gloomy looks of thecardinal.

    "It does not signify, gentlemen," continued the cardinal, withoutappearing to be in the least swerved from his first intention bythe diversion which Athos had started, "it does not signify,gentlemen.  I do not like to have simple soldiers, because theyhave the advantage of serving in a privileged corps, thus to playthe great lords; discipline is the same for them as for everybodyelse."

    Athos allowed the cardinal to finish his sentence completely, andbowed in sign of assent.  Then he resumed in his turn:"Discipline, Monseigneur, has, I hope, in no way been forgottenby us.  We are not on duty, and we believed that not being onduty we were at liberty to dispose of our time as we pleased.  Ifwe are so fortunate as to have some particular duty to performfor your Eminence, we are ready to obey you.  Your Eminence mayperceive," continued Athos, knitting his brow, for this sort ofinvestigation began to annoy him, "that we have not come outwithout our arms."

    And he showed the cardinal, with his finger, the four musketspiled near the drum, on which were the cards and dice."Your Eminence may believe," added D'Artagnan, "that we wouldhave come to meet you, if we could have supposed it wasMonseigneur coming toward us with so few attendants."The cardinal bit his mustache, and even his lips a little."Do you know what you look like, all together, as you are armedand guarded by your lackeys?" said the cardinal.  "You look likefour conspirators."

    "Oh, as to that, Monseigneur, it is true," said Athos; "we doconspire, as your Eminence might have seen the other morning.Only we conspire against the Rochellais."

    "Ah, you gentlemen of policy!" replied the cardinal, knitting hisbrow in his turn, "the secret of many unknown things mightperhaps be found in your brains, if we could read them as youread that letter which you concealed as soon as you saw mecoming."

    The color mounted to the face of Athos, and he made a step towardhis Eminence.

    "One might think you really suspected us, monseigneur, and wewere undergoing a real interrogatory.  If it be so, we trust yourEminence will deign to explain yourself, and we should then atleast be acquainted with our real position."

    "And if it were an interrogatory!" replied the cardinal.  "Othersbesides you have undergone such, Monsieur Athos, and have repliedthereto."

    "Thus I have told your Eminence that you had but to question us,and we are ready to reply."

    "What was that letter you were about to read, Monsieur Aramis,and which you so promptly concealed?"

    "A woman's letter, monseigneur."

    "Ah, yes, I see," said the cardinal; "we must be discreet withthis sort of letters; but nevertheless, we may show them to aconfessor, and you know I have taken orders."

    "Monseigneur," said Athos, with a calmness the more terriblebecause he risked his head in making this reply, "the letter is awoman's letter, but it is neither signed Marion de Lorme, norMadame d'Aiguillon."

    The cardinal became as pale as death; lightning darted from hiseyes.  He turned round as if to give an order to Cahusac andHoudiniere.  Athos saw the movement; he made a step toward themuskets, upon which the other three friends had fixed their eyes,like men ill-disposed to allow themselves to be taken.  Thecardinalists were three; the Musketeers, lackeys included, wereseven.  He judged that the match would be so much the less equal,if Athos and his companions were really plotting; and by one ofthose rapid turns which he always had at command, all his angerfaded away into a smile.

    "Well, well!" said he, "you are brave young men, proud indaylight, faithful in darkness.  We can find no fault with youfor watching over yourselves, when you watch so carefully overothers.  Gentlemen, I have not forgotten the night in which youserved me as an escort to the Red Dovecot.  If there were anydanger to be apprehended on the road I am going, I would requestyou to accompany me; but as there is none, remain where you are,finish your bottles, your game, and your letter.  Adieu,gentlemen!"

    And remounting his horse, which Cahusac led to him, he salutedthem with his hand, and rode away.

    The four young men, standing and motionless, followed him withtheir eyes without speaking a single word until he haddisappeared.  Then they looked at one another.

    The countenances of all gave evidence of terror, fornotwithstanding the friendly adieu of his Eminence, they plainlyperceived that the cardinal went away with rage in his heart.Athos alone smiled, with a self-possessed, disdainful smile.When the cardinal was out of hearing and sight, "That Grimaudkept bad watch!" cried Porthos, who had a great inclination tovent his ill-humor on somebody.

    Grimaud was about to reply to excuse himself.  Athos lifted hisfinger, and Grimaud was silent.

    "Would you have given up the letter, Aramis?" said D'Artagnan."I," said Aramis, in his most flutelike tone, "I had made up mymind.  If he had insisted upon the letter being given up to him,I would have presented the letter to him with one hand, and withthe other I would have run my sword through his body.""I expected as much," said Athos; "and that was why I threwmyself between you and him.  Indeed, this man is very much toblame for talking thus to other men; one would say he had neverhad to do with any but women and children."

    "My dear Athos, I admire you, but nevertheless we were in thewrong, after all."

    "How, in the wrong?" said Athos.  "Whose, then, is the air webreathe?  Whose is the ocean upon which we look?  Whose is thesand upon which we were reclining?  Whose is that letter of yourmistress?  Do these belong to the cardinal?  Upon my honor, thisman fancies the world belongs to him.  There you stood,stammering, stupefied, annihilated.  One might have supposed theBastille appeared before you, and that the gigantic Medusa hadconverted you into stone.  Is being in love conspiring?  You arein love with a woman whom the cardinal has caused to be shut up,and you wish to get her out of the hands of the cardinal.  That'sa match you are playing with his Eminence; this letter is yourgame.  Why should you expose your game to your adversary?  Thatis never done.  Let him find it out if he can!  We can find outhis!"

    "Well, that's all very sensible, Athos," said D'Artagnan."In that case, let there be no more question of what's past, andlet Aramis resume the letter from his cousin where the cardinalinterrupted him."

    Aramis drew the letter from his pocket; the three friendssurrounded him, and the three lackeys grouped themselves againnear the wine jar.

    "You had only read a line or two," said D'Artagnan; "read theletter again from the commencement."

    "Willingly," said Aramis.

    "My dear Cousin, I think I shall make up my mind to set out forBethune, where my sister has placed our little servant in theconvent of the Carmelites; this poor child is quite resigned, asshe knows she cannot live elsewhere without the salvation of hersoul being in danger.  Nevertheless, if the affairs of our familyare arranged, as we hope they will be, I believe she will run therisk of being damned, and will return to those she regrets,particularly as she knows they are always thinking of her.Meanwhile, she is not very wretched; what she most desires is aletter from her intended.  I know that such viands pass withdifficulty through convent gratings; but after all, as I havegiven you proofs, my dear cousin, I am not unskilled in suchaffairs, and I will take charge of the commission.  My sisterthanks you for your good and eternal remembrance.  She hasexperienced much anxiety; but she is now at length a littlereassured, having sent her secretary away in order that nothingmay happen unexpectedly.

    "Adieu, my dear cousin.  Tell us news of yourself as often as youcan; that is to say, as often as you can with safety.  I embraceyou.

    "Marie Michon."

    "Oh, what do I not owe you, Aramis?" said D'Artagnan.  "DearConstance!  I have at length, then, intelligence of you.  Shelives; she is in safety in a convent; she is at Bethune!  Whereis Bethune, Athos?"

    "Why, upon the frontiers of Artois and of Flanders.  The siegeonce over, we shall be able to make a tour in that direction.""And that will not be long, it is to be hoped," said Porthos;"for they have this morning hanged a spy who confessed that theRochellais were reduced to the leather of their shoes.  Supposingthat after having eaten the leather they eat the soles, I cannotsee much that is left unless they eat one another.""Poor fools!" said Athos, emptying a glass of excellent Bordeauxwine which, without having at that period the reputation it nowenjoys, merited it no less, "poor fools!  As if the Catholicreligion was not the most advantageous and the most agreeable ofall religions!  All the same," resumed he, after having clickedhis tongue against his palate, "they are brave fellows!  But whatthe devil are you about, Aramis?" continued Athos.  "Why, you aresqueezing that letter into your pocket!"

    "Yes," said D'Artagnan, "Athos is right, it must be burned.  Andyet if we burn it, who knows whether Monsieur Cardinal has not asecret to interrogate ashes?"

    "He must have one," said Athos.

    "What will you do with the letter, then?" asked Porthos."Come here, Grimaud," said Athos.  Grimaud rose and obeyed.  "Asa punishment for having spoken without permission, my friend, youwill please to eat this piece of paper; then to recompense youfor the service you will have rendered us, you shall afterwarddrink this glass of wine.  First, here is the letter.  Eatheartily."

    Grimaud smiled; and with his eyes fixed upon the glass whichAthos held in his hand, he ground the paper well between histeeth and then swallowed it.

    "Bravo, Monsieur Grimaud!" said Athos; "and now take this.That's well.  We dispense with your saying grace."Grimaud silently swallowed the glass of Bordeaux wine; but hiseyes, raised toward heaven during this delicious occupation,spoke a language which, though mute, was not the less expressive."And now," said Athos, "unless Monsieur Cardinal should form theingenious idea of ripping up Grimaud, I think we may be prettymuch at our ease respecting the letter."

    Meantime, his Eminence continued his melancholy ride, murmuringbetween his mustaches, "These four men must positively be mine."

    52  CAPTIVITY:  THE FIRST DAY

    Let us return to Milady, whom a glance thrown upon the coast ofFrance has made us lose sight of for an instant.

    We shall find her still in the despairing attitude in which weleft her, plunged in an abyss of dismal reflection--a dark hellat the gate of which she has almost left hope behind, because forthe first time she doubts, for the first time she fears.On two occasions her fortune has failed her, on two occasions shehas found herself discovered and betrayed; and on these twooccasions it was to one fatal genius, sent doubtlessly by theLord to combat her, that she has succumbed.  D'Artagnan hasconquered her--her, that invincible power of evil.He has deceived her in her love, humbled her in her pride,thwarted her in her ambition; and now he ruins her fortune,deprives her of liberty, and even threatens her life.  Stillmore, he has lifted the corner of her mask--that shield withwhich she covered herself and which rendered her so strong.D'Artagnan has turned aside from Buckingham, whom she hates asshe hates everyone she has loved, the tempest with whichRichelieu threatened him in the person of the queen.  D'Artagnanhad passed himself upon her as De Wardes, for whom she hadconceived one of those tigerlike fancies common to women of hercharacter.  D'Artagnan knows that terrible secret which she hassworn no one shall know without dying.  In short, at the momentin which she has just obtained from Richelieu a carte blanche bythe means of which she is about to take vengeance on her enemy,this precious paper is torn from her hands, and it is D'Artagnanwho holds her prisoner and is about to send her to some filthyBotany Bay, some infamous Tyburn of the Indian Ocean.

    All this she owes to D'Artagnan, without doubt.  From whom cancome so many disgraces heaped upon her head, if not from him?  Healone could have transmitted to Lord de Winter all thesefrightful secrets which he has discovered, one after another, bya train of fatalities.  He knows her brother-in-law.  He musthave written to him.

    What hatred she distills!  Motionless, with her burning and fixedglances, in her solitary apartment, how well the outbursts ofpassion which at times escape from the depths of her chest withher respiration, accompany the sound of the surf which rises,growls, roars, and breaks itself like an eternal and powerlessdespair against the rocks on which is built this dark and loftycastle!  How many magnificent projects of vengeance she conceivesby the light of the flashes which her tempestuous passion castsover her mind against Mme. Bonacieux, against Buckingham, butabove all against D'Artagnan--projects lost in the distance ofthe future.

    Yes; but in order to avenge herself she must be free.  And to befree, a prisoner has to pierce a wall, detach bars, cut through afloor--all undertakings which a patient and strong man mayaccomplish, but before which the feverish irritations of a womanmust give way.  Besides, to do all this, time is necessary--months, years; and she has ten or twelve days, as Lord de Winter,her fraternal and terrible jailer, has told her.

    And yet, if she were a man she would attempt all this, andperhaps might succeed; why, then, did heaven make the mistake ofplacing that manlike soul in that frail and delicate body?The first moments of her captivity were terrible; a fewconvulsions of rage which she could not suppress paid her debt offeminine weakness to nature.  But by degrees she overcame theoutbursts of her mad passion; and nervous tremblings whichagitated her frame disappeared, and she remained folded withinherself like a fatigued serpent in repose.

    "Go to, go to!  I must have been mad to allow myself to becarried away so," says she, gazing into the glass, which reflectsback to her eyes the burning glance by which she appears tointerrogate herself.  "No violence; violence is the proof ofweakness.  In the first place, I have never succeeded by thatmeans.  Perhaps if I employed my strength against women I mightperchance find them weaker than myself, and consequently conquerthem; but it is with men that I struggle, and I am but a woman tothem.  Let me fight like a woman, then; my strength is in myweakness."

    Then, as if to render an account to herself of the changes shecould place upon her countenance, so mobile and so expressive,she made it take all expressions from that of passionate anger,which convulsed her features, to that of the most sweet, mostaffectionate, and most seducing smile.  Then her hair assumedsuccessively, under her skillful hands, all the undulations shethought might assist the charms of her face.  At length shemurmured, satisfied with herself, "Come, nothing is lost; I amstill beautiful."

    It was then nearly eight o'clock in the evening.  Miladyperceived a bed; she calculated that the repose of a few hourswould not only refresh her head and her ideas, but still further,her complexion.  A better idea, however, came into her mindbefore going to bed.  She had heard something said about supper.She had already been an hour in this apartment; they could notlong delay bringing her a repast.  The prisoner did not wish tolose time; and she resolved to make that very evening someattempts to ascertain the nature of the ground she had to workupon, by studying the characters of the men to whose guardianshipshe was committed.

    A light appeared under the door; this light announced thereappearance of her jailers.  Milady, who had arisen, threwherself quickly into the armchair, her head thrown back, herbeautiful hair unbound and disheveled, her bosom half barebeneath her crumpled lace, one hand on her heart, and the otherhanging down.

    The bolts were drawn; the door groaned upon its hinges.  Stepssounded in the chamber, and drew near.

    "Place that table there," said a voice which the prisonerrecognized as that of Felton.

    The order was executed.

    "You will bring lights, and relieve the sentinel," continuedFelton.

    And this double order which the young lieutenant gave to the sameindividuals proved to Milady that her servants were the same menas her guards; that is to say, soldiers.

    Felton's orders were, for the rest, executed with a silentrapidity that gave a good idea of the way in which he maintaineddiscipline.

    At length Felton, who had not yet looked at Milady, turned towardher.

    "Ah, ah!" said he, "she is asleep; that's well.  When she wakesshe can sup."  And he made some steps toward the door."But, my lieutenant," said a soldier, less stoical than hischief, and who had approached Milady, "this woman is not asleep.""What, not asleep!" said Felton; "what is she doing, then?""She has fainted.  Her face is very pale, and I have listened invain; I do not hear her breathe."

    "You are right," said Felton, after having looked at Milady fromthe spot on which he stood without moving a step toward her. "Goand tell Lord de Winter that his prisoner has fainted--for thisevent not having been foreseen, I don't know what to do."The soldier went out to obey the orders of his officer.  Feltonsat down upon an armchair which happened to be near the door, andwaited without speaking a word, without making a gesture.  Miladypossessed that great art, so much studied by women, of lookingthrough her long eyelashes without appearing to open the lids.She perceived Felton, who sat with his back toward her.  Shecontinued to look at him for nearly ten minutes, and in these tenminutes the immovable guardian never turned round once.She then thought that Lord de Winter would come, and by hispresence give fresh strength to her jailer.  Her first trial waslost; she acted like a woman who reckons up her resources.  As aresult she raised her head, opened her eyes, and sighed deeply.At this sigh Felton turned round.

    "Ah, you are awake, madame," he said; "then I have nothing moreto do here.  If you want anything you can ring."

    "Oh, my God, my God! how I have suffered!" said Milady, in thatharmonious voice which, like that of the ancient enchantresses,charmed all whom she wished to destroy.

    And she assumed, upon sitting up in the armchair, a still moregraceful and abandoned position than when she reclined.Felton arose.

    "You will be served, thus, madame, three times a day," said he."In the morning at nine o'clock, in the day at one o'clock, andin the evening at eight.  If that does not suit you, you canpoint out what other hours you prefer, and in this respect yourwishes will be complied with."

    "But am I to remain always alone in this vast and dismalchamber?" asked Milady.

    "A woman of the neighbourhood has been sent for, who will betomorrow at the castle, and will return as often as you desireher presence."

    "I thank you, sir," replied the prisoner, humbly.Felton made a slight bow, and directed his steps toward the door.At the moment he was about to go out, Lord de Winter appeared inthe corridor, followed by the soldier who had been sent to informhim of the swoon of Milady.  He held a vial of salts in his hand."Well, what is it--what is going on here?" said he, in a jeeringvoice, on seeing the prisoner sitting up and Felton about to goout.  "Is this corpse come to life already?  Felton, my lad, didyou not perceive that you were taken for a novice, and that thefirst act was being performed of a comedy of which we shalldoubtless have the pleasure of following out all thedevelopments?"

    "I thought so, my lord," said Felton; "but as the prisoner is awoman, after all, I wish to pay her the attention that every manof gentle birth owes to a woman, if not on her account, at leaston my own."

    Milady shuddered through her whole system.  These words ofFelton's passed like ice through her veins.

    "So," replied De Winter, laughing, "that beautiful hair soskillfully disheveled, that white skin, and that languishinglook, have not yet seduced you, you heart of stone?""No, my Lord," replied the impassive young man; "your Lordshipmay be assured that it requires more than the tricks and coquetryof a woman to corrupt me."

    "In that case, my brave lieutenant, let us leave Milady to findout something else, and go to supper; but be easy!  She has afruitful imagination, and the second act of the comedy will notdelay its steps after the first."

    And at these words Lord de Winter passed his arm through that ofFelton, and led him out, laughing.

    "Oh, I will be a match for you!" murmured Milady, between herteeth; "be assured of that, you poor spoiled monk, you poorconverted soldier, who has cut his uniform out of a monk'sfrock!"

    "By the way," resumed De Winter, stopping at the threshold of thedoor, "you must not, Milady, let this check take away yourappetite.  Taste that fowl and those fish.  On my honor, they arenot poisoned.  I have a very good cook, and he is not to be myheir; I have full and perfect confidence in him.  Do as I do.Adieu, dear sister, till your next swoon!"

    This was all that Milady could endure.  Her hands clutched herarmchair; she ground her teeth inwardly; her eyes followed themotion of the door as it closed behind Lord de Winter and Felton,and the moment she was alone a fresh fit of despair seized her.She cast her eyes upon the table, saw the glittering of a knife,rushed toward it and clutched it; but her disappointment wascruel.  The blade was round, and of flexible silver.A burst of laughter resounded from the other side of the ill-closed door, and the door reopened.

    "Ha, ha!" cried Lord de Winter; "ha, ha!  Don't you see, my braveFelton; don't you see what I told you?  That knife was for you,my lad; she would have killed you.  Observe, this is one of herpeculiarities, to get rid thus, after one fashion or another, ofall the people who bother her.  If I had listened to you, theknife would have been pointed and of steel.  Then no more ofFelton; she would have cut your throat, and after that everybodyelse's.  See, John, see how well she knows how to handle aknife."

    In fact, Milady still held the harmless weapon in her clenchedhand; but these last words, this supreme insult, relaxed herhands, her strength, and even her will.  The knife fell to theground.

    "You were right, my Lord," said Felton, with a tone of profounddisgust which sounded to the very bottom of the heart of Milady,"you were right, my Lord, and I was wrong."

    And both again left the room.

    But this time Milady lent a more attentive ear than the first,and she heard their steps die away in the distance of thecorridor.

    "I am lost," murmured she; "I am lost!  I am in the power of menupon whom I can have no more influence than upon statues ofbronze or granite; they know me by heart, and are steeled againstall my weapons.  It is, however, impossible that this should endas they have decreed!"

    In fact, as this last reflection indicated--this instinctivereturn to hope--sentiments of weakness or fear did not dwell longin her ardent spirit.  Milady sat down to table, ate from severaldishes, drank a little Spanish wine, and felt all her resolutionreturn.

    Before she went to bed she had pondered, analyzed, turned on allsides, examined on all points, the words, the steps, thegestures, the signs, and even the silence of her interlocutors;and of this profound, skillful, and anxious study the result wasthat Felton, everything considered, appeared the more vulnerableof her two persecutors.

    One expression above all recurred to the mind of the prisoner:"If I had listened to you," Lord de Winter had said to Felton.Felton, then, had spoken in her favor, since Lord de Winter hadnot been willing to listen to him.

    "Weak or strong," repeated Milady, "that man has, then, a sparkof pity in his soul; of that spark I will make a flame that shalldevour him.  As to the other, he knows me, he fears me, and knowswhat he has to expect of me if ever I escape from his hands.  Itis useless, then, to attempt anything with him.  But Felton--that's another thing.  He is a young, ingenious, pure man whoseems virtuous; him there are means of destroying."And Milady went to bed and fell asleep with a smile upon herlips.  Anyone who had seen her sleeping might have said she was ayoung girl dreaming of the crown of flowers she was to wear onher brow at the next festival.

    53  CAPTIVITY:  THE SECOND DAY

    Milady dreamed that she at length had D'Artagnan in her power,that she was present at his execution; and it was the sight ofhis odious blood, flowing beneath the ax of the headsman, whichspread that charming smile upon her lips.

    She slept as a prisoner sleeps, rocked by his first hope.In the morning, when they entered her chamber she was still inbed.  Felton remained in the corridor.  He brought with him thewoman of whom he had spoken the evening before, and who had justarrived; this woman entered, and approaching Milady's bed,offered her services.

    Milady was habitually pale; her complexion might thereforedeceive a person who saw her for the first time.

    "I am in a fever," said she; "I have not slept a single instantduring all this long night.  I suffer horribly.  Are you likelyto be more humane to me than others were yesterday?  All I ask ispermission to remain abed."

    "Would you like to have a physician called?" said the woman.Felton listened to this dialogue without speaking a word.Milady reflected that the more people she had around her the moreshe would have to work upon, and Lord de Winter would redoublehis watch.  Besides, the physician might declare the ailmentfeigned; and Milady, after having lost the first trick, was notwilling to lose the second.

    "Go and fetch a physician?" said she.  "What could be the good ofthat?  These gentlemen declared yesterday that my illness was acomedy; it would be just the same today, no doubt--for sinceyesterday evening they have had plenty of time to send for adoctor."

    "Then," said Felton, who became impatient, "say yourself, madame,what treatment you wish followed."

    "Eh, how can I tell?  My God!  I know that I suffer, that's all.Give me anything you like, it is of little consequence.""Go and fetch Lord de Winter," said Felton, tired of theseeternal complaints.

    "Oh, no, no!" cried Milady; "no, sir, do not call him, I conjureyou.  I am well, I want nothing; do not call him."She gave so much vehemence, such magnetic eloquence to thisexclamation, that Felton in spite of himself advanced some stepsinto the room.

    "He has come!" thought Milady.

    "Meanwhile, madame, if you really suffer," said Felton, "aphysician shall be sent for; and if you deceive us--well, it willbe the worse for you.  But at least we shall not have to reproachourselves with anything."

    Milady made no reply, but turning her beautiful head round uponher pillow, she burst into tears, and uttered heartbreaking sobs.Felton surveyed her for an instant with his usual impassiveness;then, seeing that the crisis threatened to be prolonged, he wentout.  The woman followed him, and Lord de Winter did not appear."I fancy I begin to see my way," murmured Milady, with a savagejoy, burying herself under the clothes to conceal from anybodywho might be watching her this burst of inward satisfaction.Two hours passed away.

    "Now it is time that the malady should be over," said she; "letme rise, and obtain some success this very day.  I have but tendays, and this evening two of them will be gone."In the morning, when they entered Milady's chamber they hadbrought her breakfast.  Now, she thought, they could not longdelay coming to clear the table, and that Felton would thenreappear.

    Milady was not deceived.  Felton reappeared, and withoutobserving whether Milady had or had not touched her repast, madea sign that the table should be carried out of the room, ithaving been brought in ready spread.

    Felton remained behind; he held a book in his hand.Milady, reclining in an armchair near the chimney, beautiful,pale, and resigned, looked like a holy virgin awaiting martyrdom.Felton approached her, and said, "Lord de Winter, who is aCatholic, like yourself, madame, thinking that the deprivation ofthe rites and ceremonies of your church might be painful to you,has consented that you should read every day the ordinary of yourMass; and here is a book which contains the ritual."At the manner in which Felton laid the book upon the little tablenear which Milady was sitting, at the tone in which he pronouncedthe two words, YOUR MASS, at the disdainful smile with which heaccompanied them, Milady raised her head, and looked moreattentively at the officer.

    By that plain arrangement of the hair, by that costume of extremesimplicity, by the brow polished like marble and as hard andimpenetrable, she recognized one of those gloomy Puritans she hadso often met, not only in the court of King James, but in that ofthe King of France, where, in spite of the remembrance of the St.Bartholomew, they sometimes came to seek refuge.

    She then had one of those sudden inspirations which only peopleof genius receive in great crises, in supreme moments which areto decide their fortunes or their lives.

    Those two words, YOUR MASS, and a simple glance cast uponFelton, revealed to her all the importance of the reply she wasabout to make; but with that rapidity of intelligence which waspeculiar to her, this reply, ready arranged, presented itself toher lips:

    "I?" said she, with an accent of disdain in unison with thatwhich she had remarked in the voice of the young officer, "I,sir?  MY MASS?  Lord de Winter, the corrupted Catholic, knowsvery well that I am not of his religion, and this is a snare hewishes to lay for me!"

    "And of what religion are you, then, madame?" asked Felton, withan astonishment which in spite of the empire he held over himselfhe could not entirely conceal.

    "I will tell it," cried Milady, with a feigned exultation, "onthe day when I shall have suffered sufficiently for my faith."The look of Felton revealed to Milady the full extent of thespace she had opened for herself by this single word.The young officer, however, remained mute and motionless; hislook alone had spoken.

    "I am in the hands of my enemies," continued she, with that toneof enthusiasm which she knew was familiar to the Puritans."Well, let my God save me, or let me perish for my God!  That isthe reply I beg you to make to Lord de Winter.  And as to thisbook," added she, pointing to the manual with her finger butwithout touching it, as if she must be contaminated by it, "youmay carry it back and make use of it yourself, for doubtless youare doubly the accomplice of Lord de Winter--the accomplice inhis persecutions, the accomplice in his heresies."Felton made no reply, took the book with the same appearance ofrepugnance which he had before manifested, and retired pensively.Lord de Winter came toward five o'clock in the evening.  Miladyhad had time, during the whole day, to trace her plan of conduct.She received him like a woman who had already recovered all heradvantages.

    "It appears," said the baron, seating himself in the armchairopposite that occupied by Milady, and stretching out his legscarelessly upon the hearth, "it appears we have made a littleapostasy!"

    "What do you mean, sir!"

    "I mean to say that since we last met you have changed yourreligion.  You have not by chance married a Protestant for athird husband, have you?"

    "Explain yourself, my Lord," replied the prisoner, with majesty;"for though I hear your words, I declare I do not understandthem."

    "Then you have no religion at all; I like that best," repliedLord de Winter, laughing.

    "Certainly that is most in accord with your own principles,"replied Milady, frigidly.

    "Oh, I confess it is all the same to me."

    "Oh, you need not avow this religious indifference, my Lord; yourdebaucheries and crimes would vouch for it."

    "What, you talk of debaucheries, Madame Messalina, Lady Macbeth!Either I misunderstand you or you are very shameless!""You only speak thus because you are overheard," coolly repliedMilady; "and you wish to interest your jailers and your hangmenagainst me."

    "My jailers and my hangmen!  Heyday, madame! you are taking apoetical tone, and the comedy of yesterday turns to a tragedythis evening.  As to the rest, in eight days you will be whereyou ought to be, and my task will be completed."

    "Infamous task! impious task!" cried Milady, with the exultationof a victim who provokes his judge.

    "My word," said De Winter, rising, "I think the hussy is goingmad!  Come, come, calm yourself, Madame Puritan, or I'll removeyou to a dungeon.  It's my Spanish wine that has got into yourhead, is it not?  But never mind; that sort of intoxication isnot dangerous, and will have no bad effects."

    And Lord de Winter retired swearing, which at that period was avery knightly habit.

    Felton was indeed behind the door, and had not lost one word ofthis scene.  Milady had guessed aright.

    "Yes, go, go,!" said she to her brother; "the effects ARE drawingnear, on the contrary; but you, weak fool, will not see themuntil it is too late to shun them."

    Silence was re-established.  Two hours passed away.  Milady'ssupper was brought in, and she was found deeply engaged in sayingher prayers aloud--prayers which she had learned of an oldservant of her second husband, a most austere Puritan.  Sheappeared to be in ecstasy, and did not pay the least attention towhat was going on around her. Felton made a sign that she shouldnot be disturbed; and when all was arranged, he went out quietlywith the soldiers.

    Milady knew she might be watched, so she continued her prayers tothe end; and it appeared to her that the soldier who was on dutyat her door did not march with the same step, and seemed tolisten.  For the moment she wished nothing better.  She arose,came to the table, ate but little, and drank only water.An hour after, her table was cleared; but Milady remarked thatthis time Felton did not accompany the soldiers.  He feared,then, to see her too often.

    She turned toward the wall to smile--for there was in this smilesuch an expression of triumph that this smile alone would havebetrayed her.

    She allowed, therefore, half an hour to pass away; and as at thatmoment all was silence in the old castle, as nothing was heardbut the eternal murmur of the waves--that immense breaking of theocean--with her pure, harmonious, and powerful voice, she beganthe first couplet of the psalm then in great favor with thePuritans:

    "Thou leavest thy servants, Lord,

    To see if they be strong;

    But soon thou dost afford

    Thy hand to lead them on."

    These verses were not excellent--very far from it; but as it iswell known, the Puritans did not pique themselves upon theirpoetry.

    While singing, Milady listened.  The soldier on guard at her doorstopped, as if he had been changed into stone.  Milady was thenable to judge of the effect she had produced.

    Then she continued her singing with inexpressible fervor andfeeling.  It appeared to her that the sounds spread to a distancebeneath the vaulted roofs, and carried with them a magic charm tosoften the hearts of her jailers.  It however likewise appearedthat the soldier on duty--a zealous Catholic, no doubt--shook offthe charm, for through the door he called:  "Hold your tongue,madame!  Your song is as dismal as a 'De profundis'; and ifbesides the pleasure of being in garrison here, we must hear suchthings as these, no mortal can hold out."

    "Silence!" then exclaimed another stern voice which Miladyrecognized as that of Felton.  "What are you meddling with,stupid?  Did anybody order you to prevent that woman fromsinging?  No.  You were told to guard her--to fire at her if sheattempted to fly.  Guard her!  If she flies, kill her; but don'texceed your orders."

    An expression of unspeakable joy lightened the countenance ofMilady; but this expression was fleeting as the reflection oflightning.  Without appearing to have heard the dialogue, ofwhich she had not lost a word, she began again, giving to hervoice all the charm, all the power, all the seduction the demonhad bestowed upon it:

    "For all my tears, my cares,

    My exile, and my chains,

    I have my youth, my prayers,

    And God, who counts my pains."

    Her voice, of immense power and sublime expression, gave to therude, unpolished poetry of these psalms a magic and an effectwhich the most exalted Puritans rarely found in the songs oftheir brethren, and which they were forced to ornament with allthe resources of their imagination.  Felton believed he heard thesinging of the angel who consoled the three Hebrews in thefurnace.

    Milady continued:

    "One day our doors will ope,

    With God come our desire;

    And if betrays that hope,

    To death we can aspire."

    This verse, into which the terrible enchantress threw her wholesoul, completed the trouble which had seized the heart of theyoung officer.  He opened the door quickly; and Milady saw himappear, pale as usual, but with his eye inflamed and almost wild."Why do you sing thus, and with such a voice?" said he."Your pardon, sir," said Milady, with mildness.  "I forgot thatmy songs are out of place in this castle.  I have perhapsoffended you in your creed; but it was without wishing to do so,I swear.  Pardon me, then, a fault which is perhaps great, butwhich certainly was involuntary."

    Milady was so beautiful at this moment, the religious ecstasy inwhich she appeared to be plunged gave such an expression to hercountenance, that Felton was so dazzled that he fancied he beheldthe angel whom he had only just before heard.

    "Yes, yes," said he; "you disturb, you agitate the people wholive in the castle."

    The poor, senseless young man was not aware of the incoherence ofhis words, while Milady was reading with her lynx's eyes the verydepths of his heart.

    "I will be silent, then," said Milady, casting down her eyes withall the sweetness she could give to her voice, with all theresignation she could impress upon her manner.

    "No, no, madame," said Felton, "only do not sing so loud,particularly at night."

    And at these words Felton, feeling that he could not longmaintain his severity toward his prisoner, rushed out of theroom.

    "You have done right, Lieutenant," said the soldier.  "Such songsdisturb the mind; and yet we become accustomed to them, her voiceis so beautiful."

    54  CAPTIVITY:  THE THIRD DAY

    Felton had fallen; but there was still another step to be taken.He must be retained, or rather he must be left quite alone; andMilady but obscurely perceived the means which could lead to thisresult.

    Still more must be done.  He must be made to speak, in order thathe might be spoken to--for Milady very well knew that hergreatest seduction was in her voice, which so skillfully ran overthe whole gamut of tones from human speech to language celestial.Yet in spite of all this seduction Milady might fail--for Feltonwas forewarned, and that against the least chance.  From thatmoment she watched all his actions, all his words, from thesimplest glance of his eyes to his gestures--even to a breaththat could be interpreted as a sigh.  In short, she studiedeverything, as a skillful comedian does to whom a new part hasbeen assigned in a line to which he is not accustomed.Face to face with Lord de Winter her plan of conduct was moreeasy.  She had laid that down the preceding evening.  To remainsilent and dignified in his presence; from time to time toirritate him by affected disdain, by a contemptuous word; toprovoke him to threats and violence which would produce acontrast with her own resignation--such was her plan.  Feltonwould see all; perhaps he would say nothing, but he would see.In the morning, Felton came as usual; but Milady allowed him topreside over all the preparations for breakfast withoutaddressing a word to him.  At the moment when he was about toretire, she was cheered with a ray of hope, for she thought hewas about to speak; but his lips moved without any sound leavinghis mouth, and making a powerful effort to control himself, hesent back to his heart the words that were about to escape fromhis lips, and went out.  Toward midday, Lord de Winter entered.It was a tolerably fine winter's day, and a ray of that paleEnglish sun which lights but does not warm came through the barsof her prison.

    Milady was looking out at the window, and pretended not to hearthe door as it opened.

    "Ah, ah!" said Lord de Winter, "after having played comedy, afterhaving played tragedy, we are now playing melancholy?"The prisoner made no reply.

    "Yes, yes," continued Lord de Winter, "I understand.  You wouldlike very well to be a liberty on that beach!  You would likevery well to be in a good ship dancing upon the waves of thatemerald-green sea; you would like very well, either on land or onthe ocean, to lay for me one of those nice little ambuscades youare so skillful in planning.  Patience, patience!  In four days'time the shore will be beneath your feet, the sea will be open toyou--more open than will perhaps be agreeable to you, for in fourdays England will be relieved of you."

    Milady folded her hands, and raising her fine eyes toward heaven,"Lord, Lord," said she, with an angelic meekness of gesture andtone, "pardon this man, as I myself pardon him."

    "Yes, pray, accursed woman!" cried the baron; "your prayer is somuch the more generous from your being, I swear to you, in thepower of a man who will never pardon you!" and he went out.At the moment he went out a piercing glance darted through theopening of the nearly closed door, and she perceived Felton, whodrew quickly to one side to prevent being seen by her.Then she threw herself upon her knees, and began to pray."My God, my God!" said she, "thou knowest in what holy cause Isuffer; give me, then, strength to suffer."

    The door opened gently; the beautiful supplicant pretended not tohear the noise, and in a voice broken by tears, she continued:"God of vengeance!  God of goodness! wilt thou allow thefrightful projects of this man to be accomplished?"Then only she pretended to hear the sound of Felton's steps, andrising quick as thought, she blushed, as if ashamed of beingsurprised on her knees.

    "I do not like to disturb those who pray, madame," said Felton,seriously; "do not disturb yourself on my account, I beseechyou."

    "How do you know I was praying, sir?" said Milady, in a voicebroken by sobs.  "You were deceived, sir; I was not praying.""Do you think, then, madame," replied Felton, in the same seriousvoice, but with a milder tone, "do you think I assume the rightof preventing a creature from prostrating herself before herCreator?  God forbid!  Besides, repentance becomes the guilty;whatever crimes they may have committed, for me the guilty aresacred at the feet of God!"

    "Guilty?  I?" said Milady, with a smile which might have disarmedthe angel of the last judgment.  "Guilty?  Oh, my God, thouknowest whether I am guilty!  Say I am condemned, sir, if youplease; but you know that God, who loves martyrs, sometimespermits the innocent to be condemned."

    "Were you condemned, were you innocent, were you a martyr,"replied Felton, "the greater would be the necessity for prayer;and I myself would aid you with my prayers."

    "Oh, you are a just man!" cried Milady, throwing herself at hisfeet.  "I can hold out no longer, for I fear I shall be wantingin strength at the moment when I shall be forced to undergo thestruggle, and confess my faith.  Listen, then, to thesupplication of a despairing woman.  You are abused, sir; butthat is not the question.  I only ask you one favor; and if yougrant it me, I will bless you in this world and in the next.""Speak to the master, madame," said Felton; "happily I am neithercharged with the power of pardoning nor punishing.  It is uponone higher placed than I am that God has laid thisresponsibility."

    "To you--no, to you alone!  Listen to me, rather than add to mydestruction, rather than add to my ignominy!"

    "If you have merited this shame, madame, if you have incurredthis ignominy, you must submit to it as an offering to God.""What do you say?  Oh, you do not understand me!  When I speak ofignominy, you think I speak of some chastisement, of imprisonmentor death.  Would to heaven!  Of what consequence to me isimprisonment or death?"

    "It is I who no longer understand you, madame," said Felton."Or, rather, who pretend not to understand me, sir!" replied theprisoner, with a smile of incredulity.

    "No, madame, on the honor of a soldier, on the faith of aChristian."

    "What, you are ignorant of Lord de Winter's designs upon me?""I am."

    "Impossible; you are his confidant!"

    "I never lie, madame."

    "Oh, he conceals them too little for you not to divine them.""I seek to divine nothing, madame; I wait till I am confided in,and apart from that which Lord de Winter has said to me beforeyou, he has confided nothing to me."

    "Why, then," cried Milady, with an incredible tone oftruthfulness, "you are not his accomplice; you do not know thathe destines me to a disgrace which all the punishments of theworld cannot equal in horror?"

    "You are deceived, madame," said Felton, blushing; "Lord deWinter is not capable of such a crime."

    "Good," said Milady to herself; "without thinking what it is, hecalls it a crime!"  Then aloud, "The friend of THAT WRETCH iscapable of everything."

    "Whom do you call 'that wretch'?" asked Felton.

    "Are there, then, in England two men to whom such an epithet canbe applied?"

    "You mean George Villiers?" asked Felton, whose looks becameexcited.

    "Whom Pagans and unbelieving Gentiles call Duke of Buckingham,"replied Milady.  "I could not have thought that there was anEnglishman in all England who would have required so long anexplanation to make him understand of whom I was speaking.""The hand of the Lord is stretched over him," said Felton; "hewill not escape the chastisement he deserves."

    Felton only expressed, with regard to the duke, the feeling ofexecration which all the English had declared toward him whom theCatholics themselves called the extortioner, the pillager, thedebauchee, and whom the Puritans styled simply Satan."Oh, my God, my God!" cried Milady; "when I supplicate thee topour upon this man the chastisement which is his due, thouknowest it is not my own vengeance I pursue, but the deliveranceof a whole nation that I implore!"

    "Do you know him, then?" asked Felton.

    "At length he interrogates me!" said Milady to herself, at theheight of joy at having obtained so quickly such a great result."Oh, know him?  Yes, yes! to my misfortune, to my eternalmisfortune!" and Milady twisted her arms as if in a paroxysm ofgrief.

    Felton no doubt felt within himself that his strength wasabandoning him, and he made several steps toward the door; butthe prisoner, whose eye never left him, sprang in pursuit of himand stopped him.

    "Sir," cried she, "be kind, be clement, listen to my prayer!That knife, which the fatal prudence of the baron deprived me of,because he knows the use I would make of it!  Oh, hear me to theend! that knife, give it to me for a minute only, for mercy's,for pity's sake!  I will embrace your knees!  You shall shut thedoor that you may be certain I contemplate no injury to you!  MyGod! to you--the only just, good, and compassionate being I havemet with!  To you--my preserver, perhaps!  One minute that knife,one minute, a single minute, and I will restore it to you throughthe grating of the door.  Only one minute, Mr. Felton, and youwill have saved my honor!"

    "To kill yourself?" cried Felton, with terror, forgetting towithdraw his hands from the hands of the prisoner, "to killyourself?"

    "I have told, sir," murmured Milady, lowering her voice, andallowing herself to sink overpowered to the ground; "I have toldmy secret!  He knows all!  My God, I am lost!"

    Felton remained standing, motionless and undecided."He still doubts," thought Milady; "I have not been earnestenough."

    Someone was heard in the corridor; Milady recognized the step ofLord de Winter.

    Felton recognized it also, and made a step toward the door.Milady sprang toward him.  "Oh, not a word," said she in aconcentrated voice, "not a word of all that I have said to you tothis man, or I am lost, and it would be you--you--"Then as the steps drew near, she became silent for fear of beingheard, applying, with a gesture of infinite terror, her beautifulhand to Felton's mouth.

    Felton gently repulsed Milady, and she sank into a chair.Lord de Winter passed before the door without stopping, and theyheard the noise of his footsteps soon die away.

    Felton, as pale as death, remained some instants with his earbent and listening; then, when the sound was quite extinct, hebreathed like a man awaking from a dream, and rushed out of theapartment.

    "Ah!" said Milady, listening in her turn to the noise of Felton'ssteps, which withdrew in a direction opposite to those of Lord deWinter; "at length you are mine!"

    Then her brow darkened.  "If he tells the baron," said she, "I amlost--for the baron, who knows very well that I shall not killmyself, will place me before him with a knife in my hand, and hewill discover that all this despair is but acted."She placed herself before the glass, and regarded herselfattentively; never had she appeared more beautiful."Oh, yes," said she, smiling, "but we won't tell him!"In the evening Lord de Winter accompanied the supper."Sir," said Milady, "is your presence an indispensable accessoryof my captivity?  Could you not spare me the increase of torturewhich your visits cause me?"

    "How, dear sister!" said Lord de Winter.  "Did not yousentimentally inform me with that pretty mouth of yours, so cruelto me today, that you came to England solely for the pleasure ofseeing me at your ease, an enjoyment of which you told me you sosensibly felt the deprivation that you had risked everything forit--seasickness, tempest, captivity?  Well, here I am; besatisfied.  Besides, this time, my visit has a motive."Milady trembled; she thought Felton had told all.  Perhaps neverin her life had this woman, who had experienced so many oppositeand powerful emotions, felt her heart beat so violently.She was seated.  Lord de Winter took a chair, drew it toward her,and sat down close beside her.  Then taking a paper out of hispocket, he unfolded it slowly.

    "Here," said he, "I want to show you the kind of passport which Ihave drawn up, and which will serve you henceforward as the ruleof order in the life I consent to leave you."

    Then turning his eyes from Milady to the paper, he read: "'Orderto conduct--'  The name is blank," interrupted Lord de Winter."If you have any preference you can point it out to me; and if itbe not within a thousand leagues of London, attention will bepaid to your wishes.  I will begin again, then:

    "'Order to conduct to--the person named Charlotte Backson,branded by the justice of the kingdom of France, but liberatedafter chastisement.  She is to dwell in this place without evergoing more than three leagues from it.  In case of any attempt toescape, the penalty of death is to be applied.  She will receivefive shillings per day for lodging and food'".

    "That order does not concern me," replied Milady, coldly, "sinceit bears another name than mine."

    "A name?  Have you a name, then?"

    "I bear that of your brother."

    "Ay, but you are mistaken.  My brother is only your secondhusband; and your first is still living.  Tell me his name, and Iwill put it in the place of the name of Charlotte Backson.  No?You will not?  You are silent?  Well, then you must be registeredas Charlotte Backson."

    Milady remained silent; only this time it was no longer fromaffectation, but from terror.  She believed the order ready forexecution.  She thought that Lord de Winter had hastened herdeparture; she thought she was condemned to set off that veryevening.  Everything in her mind was lost for an instant; whenall at once she perceived that no signature was attached to theorder.  The joy she felt at this discovery was so great she couldnot conceal it.

    "Yes, yes," said Lord de Winter, who perceived what was passingin her mind; "yes, you look for the signature, and you say toyourself:  'All is not lost, for that order is not signed.  It isonly shown to me to terrify me, that's all.'  You are mistaken.Tomorrow this order will be sent to the Duke of Buckingham.  Theday after tomorrow it will return signed by his hand and markedwith his seal; and four-and-twenty hours afterward I will answerfor its being carried into execution.  Adieu, madame.  That isall I had to say to you."

    "And I reply to you, sir, that this abuse of power, this exileunder a fictitious name, are infamous!"

    "Would you like better to be hanged in your true name, Milady?You know that the English laws are inexorable on the abuse ofmarriage.  Speak freely.  Although my name, or rather that of mybrother, would be mixed up with the affair, I will risk thescandal of a public trial to make myself certain of getting ridof you."

    Milady made no reply, but became as pale as a corpse."Oh, I see you prefer peregrination.  That's well madame; andthere is an old proverb that says, 'Traveling trains youth.'  Myfaith! you are not wrong after all, and life is sweet.  That'sthe reason why I take such care you shall not deprive me of mine.There only remains, then, the question of the five shillings tobe settled.  You think me rather parsimonious, don't you?  That'sbecause I don't care to leave you the means of corrupting yourjailers.  Besides, you will always have your charms left toseduce them with.  Employ them, if your check with regard toFelton has not disgusted you with attempts of that kind.""Felton has not told him," said Milady to herself.  "Nothing islost, then."

    "And now, madame, till I see you again!  Tomorrow I will come andannounce to you the departure of my messenger."

    Lord de Winter rose, saluted her ironically, and went out.Milady breathed again.  She had still four days before her.  Fourdays would quite suffice to complete the seduction of Felton.A terrible idea, however, rushed into her mind.  She thought thatLord de Winter would perhaps send Felton himself to get the ordersigned by the Duke of Buckingham.  In that case Felton wouldescape her--for in order to secure success, the magic of acontinuous seduction was necessary.  Nevertheless, as we havesaid, one circumstance reassured her.  Felton had not spoken.As she would not appear to be agitated by the threats of Lord deWinter, she placed herself at the table and ate.

    Then, as she had done the evening before, she fell on her kneesand repeated her prayers aloud.  As on the evening before, thesoldier stopped his march to listen to her.

    Soon after she heard lighter steps than those of the sentinel,which came from the end of the corridor and stopped before herdoor.

    "It is he," said she.  And she began the same religious chantwhich had so strongly excited Felton the evening before.But although her voice--sweet, full, and sonorous--vibrated asharmoniously and as affectingly as ever, the door remained shut.It appeared however to Milady that in one of the furtive glancesshe darted from time to time at the grating of the door shethought she saw the ardent eyes of the young man through thenarrow opening.  But whether this was reality or vision, he hadthis time sufficient self-command not to enter.

    However, a few instants after she had finished her religioussong, Milady thought she heard a profound sigh.  Then the samesteps she had heard approach slowly withdrew, as if with regret.

    55  CAPTIVITY:  THE FOURTH DAY

    The next day, when Felton entered Milady's apartment he found herstanding, mounted upon a chair, holding in her hands a cord madeby means of torn cambric handkerchiefs, twisted into a kind ofrope one with another, and tied at the ends.  At the noise Feltonmade in entering, Milady leaped lightly to the ground, and triedto conceal behind her the improvised cord she held in her hand.The young man was more pale than usual, and his eyes, reddened bywant of sleep, denoted that he had passed a feverish night.Nevertheless, his brow was armed with a severity more austerethan ever.

    He advanced slowly toward Milady, who had seated herself, andtaking an end of the murderous rope which by neglect, or perhapsby design, she allowed to be seen, "What is this, madame?" heasked coldly.

    "That?  Nothing," said Milady, smiling with that painfulexpression which she knew so well how to give to her smile."Ennui is the mortal enemy of prisoners; I had ennui, and Iamused myself with twisting that rope."

    Felton turned his eyes toward the part of the wall of theapartment before which he had found Milady standing in thearmchair in which she was now seated, and over her head heperceived a gilt-headed screw, fixed in the wall for the purposeof hanging up clothes or weapons.

    He started, and the prisoner saw that start--for though her eyeswere cast down, nothing escaped her.

    "What were you doing on that armchair?" asked he."Of what consequence?" replied Milady.

    "But," replied Felton, "I wish to know."

    "Do not question me," said the prisoner; "you know that we whoare true Christians are forbidden to lie."

    "Well, then," said Felton, " I will tell you what you were doing,or rather what you meant to do; you were going to complete thefatal project you cherish in your mind.  Remember, madame, if ourGod forbids falsehood, he much more severely condemns suicide.""When God sees one of his creatures persecuted unjustly, placedbetween suicide and dishonor, believe me, sir," replied Milady,in a tone of deep conviction, "God pardons suicide, for thensuicide becomes martyrdom."

    "You say either too much or too little; speak, madame.  In thename of heaven, explain yourself."

    "That I may relate my misfortunes for you to treat them asfables; that I may tell you my projects for you to go and betraythem to my persecutor?  No, sir.  Besides, of what importance toyou is the life or death of a condemned wretch?  You are onlyresponsible for my body, is it not so?  And provided you producea carcass that may be recognized as mine, they will require nomore of you; nay, perhaps you will even have a double reward.""I, madame, I?" cried Felton.  "You suppose that I would everaccept the price of your life?  Oh, you cannot believe what yousay!"

    "Let me act as I please, Felton, let me act as I please," saidMilady, elated.  "Every soldier must be ambitious, must he not?You are a lieutenant?  Well, you will follow me to the grave withthe rank of captain."

    "What have I, then, done to you," said Felton, much agitated,"that you should load me with such a responsibility before Godand before men?  In a few days you will be away from this place;your life, madame, will then no longer be under my care, and,"added he, with a sigh, "then you can do what you will with it.""So," cried Milady, as if she could not resist giving utteranceto a holy indignation, "you, a pious man, you who are called ajust man, you ask but one thing--and that is that you may not beinculpated, annoyed, by my death!"

    "It is my duty to watch over your life, madame, and I willwatch."

    "But do you understand the mission you are fulfilling?  Cruelenough, if I am guilty; but what name can you give it, what namewill the Lord give it, if I am innocent?"

    "I am a soldier, madame, and fulfill the orders I have received.""Do you believe, then, that at the day of the Last Judgment Godwill separate blind executioners from iniquitous judges?  You arenot willing that I should kill my body, and you make yourself theagent of him who would kill my soul."

    "But I repeat it again to you," replied Felton, in great emotion,"no danger threatens you; I will answer for Lord de Winter as formyself."

    "Dunce," cried Milady, "dunce! who dares to answer for anotherman, when the wisest, when those most after God's own heart,hesitate to answer for themselves, and who ranges himself on theside of the strongest and the most fortunate, to crush theweakest and the most unfortunate."

    "Impossible, madame, impossible," murmured Felton, who felt tothe bottom of his heart the justness of this argument.  "Aprisoner, you will not recover your liberty through me; living,you will not lose your life through me."

    "Yes," cried Milady, "but I shall lose that which is much dearerto me than life, I shall lose my honor, Felton; and it is you,you whom I make responsible, before God and before men, for myshame and my infamy."

    This time Felton, immovable as he was, or appeared to be, couldnot resist the secret influence which had already takenpossession of him.  To see this woman, so beautiful, fair as thebrightest vision, to see her by turns overcome with grief andthreatening; to resist at once the ascendancy of grief andbeauty--it was too much for a visionary; it was too much for abrain weakened by the ardent dreams of an ecstatic faith; it wastoo much for a heart furrowed by the love of heaven that burns,by the hatred of men that devours.

    Milady saw the trouble.  She felt by intuition the flame of theopposing passions which burned with the blood in the veins of theyoung fanatic.  As a skillful general, seeing the enemy ready tosurrender, marches toward him with a cry of victory, she rose,beautiful as an antique priestess, inspired like a Christianvirgin, her arms extended, her throat uncovered, her hairdisheveled, holding with one hand her robe modestly drawn overher breast, her look illumined by that fire which had alreadycreated such disorder in the veins of the young Puritan, and wenttoward him, crying out with a vehement air, and in her melodiousvoice, to which on this occasion she communicated a terribleenergy:

    "Let this victim to Baal be sent,

    To the lions the martyr be thrown!

    Thy God shall teach thee to repent!

    >From th' abyss he'll give ear to my moan."

    Felton stood before this strange apparition like one petrified."Who art thou?  Who art thou?" cried he, clasping his hands."Art thou a messenger from God; art thou a minister from hell;art thou an angel or a demon; callest thou thyself Eloa orAstarte?"

    "Do you not know me, Felton?  I am neither an angel nor a demon;I am a daughter of earth, I am a sister of thy faith, that isall."

    "Yes, yes!" said Felton, "I doubted, but now I believe.""You believe, and still you are an accomplice of that child ofBelial who is called Lord de Winter!  You believe, and yet youleave me in the hands of mine enemies, of the enemy of England,of the enemy of God!  You believe, and yet you deliver me up tohim who fills and defiles the world with his heresies anddebaucheries--to that infamous Sardanapalus whom the blind callthe Duke of Buckingham, and whom believers name Antichrist!""I deliver you up to Buckingham?  I? what mean you by that?""They have eyes," cried Milady, "but they see not; ears havethey, but they hear not."

    "Yes, yes!" said Felton, passing his hands over his brow, coveredwith sweat, as if to remove his last doubt.  "Yes, I recognizethe voice which speaks to me in my dreams; yes, I recognize thefeatures of the angel who appears to me every night, crying to mysoul, which cannot sleep: 'Strike, save England, save thyself--for thou wilt die without having appeased God!' Speak, speak!"cried Felton, "I can understand you now."

    A flash of terrible joy, but rapid as thought, gleamed from theeyes of Milady.

    However fugitive this homicide flash, Felton saw it, and startedas if its light had revealed the abysses of this woman's heart.He recalled, all at once, the warnings of Lord de Winter, theseductions of Milady, her first attempts after her arrival.  Hedrew back a step, and hung down his head, without, however,ceasing to look at her, as if, fascinated by this strangecreature, he could not detach his eyes from her eyes.Milady was not a woman to misunderstand the meaning of thishesitation.  Under her apparent emotions her icy coolness neverabandoned her.  Before Felton replied, and before she should beforced to resume this conversation, so difficult to be sustainedin the same exalted tone, she let her hands fall; and as if theweakness of the woman overpowered the enthusiasm of the inspiredfanatic, she said:  "But no, it is not for me to be the Judith todeliver Bethulia from this Holofernes.  The sword of the eternalis too heavy for my arm.  Allow me, then, to avoid dishonor bydeath; let me take refuge in martyrdom.  I do not ask you forliberty, as a guilty one would, nor for vengeance, as would apagan.  Let me die; that is all.  I supplicate you, I implore youon my knees--let me die, and my last sigh shall be a blessing formy preserver."

    Hearing that voice, so sweet and suppliant, seeing that look, sotimid and downcast, Felton reproached himself.  By degrees theenchantress had clothed herself with that magic adornment whichshe assumed and threw aside at will; that is to say, beauty,meekness, and tears--and above all, the irresistible attractionof mystical voluptuousness, the most devouring of allvoluptuousness.

    "Alas!" said Felton, "I can do but one thing, which is to pityyou if you prove to me you are a victim!  But Lord de Wintermakes cruel accusations against you.  You are a Christian; youare my sister in religion.  I feel myself drawn toward you--I,who have never loved anyone but my benefactor--I who have metwith nothing but traitors and impious men.  But you, madame, sobeautiful in reality, you, so pure in appearance, must havecommitted great iniquities for Lord de Winter to pursue youthus."

    "They have eyes," repeated Milady, with an accent ofindescribable grief, "but they see not; ears have they, but theyhear not."

    "But," cried the young officer, "speak, then, speak!""Confide my shame to you," cried Milady, with the blush ofmodesty upon her countenance, "for often the crime of one becomesthe shame of another--confide my shame to you, a man, and I awoman?  Oh," continued she, placing her hand modestly over herbeautiful eyes, "never! never!--I could not!"

    "To me, to a brother?" said Felton.

    Milady looked at him for some time with an expression which theyoung man took for doubt, but which, however, was nothing butobservation, or rather the wish to fascinate.

    Felton, in his turn a suppliant, clasped his hands."Well, then," said Milady, "I confide in my brother; I will dareto--"

    At this moment the steps of Lord de Winter were heard; but thistime the terrible brother-in-law of Milady did not contenthimself, as on the preceding day, with passing before the doorand going away again.  He paused, exchanged two words with thesentinel; then the door opened, and he appeared.

    During the exchange of these two words Felton drew back quickly,and when Lord de Winter entered, he was several paces from theprisoner.

    The baron entered slowly, sending a scrutinizing glance fromMilady to the young officer.

    "You have been here a very long time, John," said he.  "Has thiswoman been relating her crimes to you?  In that case I cancomprehend the length of the conversation."

    Felton started; and Milady felt she was lost if she did not cometo the assistance of the disconcerted Puritan.

    "Ah, you fear your prisoner should escape!" said she. "Well, askyour worthy jailer what favor I this instant solicited of him.""You demanded a favor,?" said the baron, suspiciously."Yes, my Lord," replied the young man, confused.

    "And what favor, pray?" asked Lord de Winter.

    "A knife, which she would return to me through the grating of thedoor a minute after she had received it," replied Felton."There is someone, then, concealed here whose throat this amiablelady is desirous of cutting," said De Winter, in an ironical,contemptuous tone.

    "There is myself," replied Milady.

    "I have given you the choice between America and Tyburn," repliedLord de Winter.  "Choose Tyburn, madame.  Believe me, the cord ismore certain than the knife."

    Felton grew pale, and made a step forward, remembering that atthe moment he entered Milady had a rope in her hand."You are right," said she, "I have often thought of it."  Thenshe added in a low voice, "And I will think of it again."Felton felt a shudder run to the marrow of his bones; probablyLord de Winter perceived this emotion.

    "Mistrust yourself, John," said he.  "I have placed reliance uponyou, my friend.  Beware!  I have warned you!  But be of goodcourage, my lad; in three days we shall be delivered from thiscreature, and where I shall send her she can harm nobody.""You hear him!" cried Milady, with vehemence, so that the baronmight believe she was addressing heaven, and that Felton mightunderstand she was addressing him.

    Felton lowered his head and reflected.

    The baron took the young officer by the arm, and turned his headover his shoulder, so as not to lose sight of Milady till he wasgone out.

    "Well," said the prisoner, when the door was shut, "I am not sofar advanced as I believed.  De Winter has changed his usualstupidity into a strange prudence.  It is the desire ofvengeance, and how desire molds a man!  As to Felton, hehesitates.  Ah, he is not a man like that cursed D'Artagnan.  APuritan only adores virgins, and he adores them by clasping hishands.  A Musketeer loves women, and he loves them by claspinghis arms round them."

    Milady waited, then, with much impatience, for she feared the daywould pass away without her seeing Felton again.  At last, in anhour after the scene we have just described, she heard someonespeaking in a low voice at the door.  Presently the door opened,and she perceived Felton.

    The young man advanced rapidly into the chamber, leaving the dooropen behind him, and making a sign to Milady to be silent; hisface was much agitated.

    "What do you want with me?" said she.

    "Listen," replied Felton, in a low voice.  "I have just sent awaythe sentinel that I might remain here without anybody knowing it,in order to speak to you without being overheard.  The baron hasjust related a frightful story to me."

    Milady assumed her smile of a resigned victim, and shook herhead.

    "Either you are a demon," continued Felton, "or the baron--mybenefactor, my father--is a monster.  I have known you four days;I have loved him four years.  I therefore may hesitate betweenyou.  Be not alarmed at what I say; I want to be convinced.Tonight, after twelve, I will come and see you, and you shallconvince me."

    "No, Felton, no, my brother," said she; "the sacrifice is toogreat, and I feel what it must cost you.  No, I am lost; do notbe lost with me.  My death will be much more eloquent than mylife, and the silence of the corpse will convince you much betterthan the words of the prisoner."

    "Be silent, madame," cried Felton, "and do not speak to me thus;I came to entreat you to promise me upon your honor, to swear tome by what you hold most sacred, that you will make no attemptupon your life."

    "I will not promise," said Milady, "for no one has more respectfor a promise or an oath than I have; and if I make a promise Imust keep it."

    "Well," said Felton, "only promise till you have seen me again.If, when you have seen me again, you still persist--well, thenyou shall be free, and I myself will give you the weapon youdesire."

    "Well," said Milady, "for you I will wait."

    "Swear."

    "I swear it, by our God.  Are you satisfied?"

    "Well," said Felton, "till tonight."

    And he darted out of the room, shut the door, and waited in thecorridor, the soldier's half-pike in his hand, and as if he hadmounted guard in his place.

    The soldier returned, and Felton gave him back his weapon.Then, through the grating to which she had drawn near, Milady sawthe young man make a sign with delirious fervor, and depart in anapparent transport of joy.

    As for her, she returned to her place with a smile of savagecontempt upon her lips, and repeated, blaspheming, that terriblename of God, by whom she had just sworn without ever havinglearned to know Him.

    "My God," said she, "what a senseless fanatic!  My God, it is I--I--and this fellow who will help me to avenge myself."

    56  CAPTIVITY:  THE FIFTH DAY

    Milady had however achieved a half-triumph, and success doubledher forces.

    It was not difficult to conquer, as she had hitherto done, menprompt to let themselves be seduced, and whom the gallanteducation of a court led quickly into her net.  Milady washandsome enough not to find much resistance on the part of theflesh, and she was sufficiently skillful to prevail over all theobstacles of the mind.

    But this time she had to contend with an unpolished nature,concentrated and insensible by force of austerity.  Religion andits observances had made Felton a man inaccessible to ordinaryseductions.  There fermented in that sublimated brain plans sovast, projects so tumultuous, that there remained no room for anycapricious or material love--that sentiment which is fed byleisure and grows with corruption.  Milady had, then, made abreach by her false virtue in the opinion of a man horriblyprejudiced against her, and by her beauty in the heart of a manhitherto hitherto chaste and pure.  In short, she had taken themeasure of motives hitherto unknown to herself, through thisexperiment, made upon the most rebellious subject that nature andreligion could submit to her study.

    Many a time, nevertheless, during the evening she despaired offate and of herself.  She did not invoke God, we very well know,but she had faith in the genius of evil--that immense sovereigntywhich reigns in all the details of human life, and by which, asin the Arabian fable, a single pomegranate seed is sufficient toreconstruct a ruined world.

    Milady, being well prepared for the reception of Felton, was ableto erect her batteries for the next day.  She knew she had onlytwo days left; that when once the order was signed by Buckingham--and Buckingham would sign it the more readily from its bearing afalse name, and he could not, therefore, recognize the woman inquestion--once this order was signed, we say, the baron wouldmake her embark immediately, and she knew very well that womencondemned to exile employ arms much less powerful in theirseductions than the pretendedly virtuous woman whose beauty islighted by the sun of the world, whose style the voice of fashionlauds, and whom a halo of aristocracy gilds with enchantingsplendors.  To be a woman condemned to a painful and disgracefulpunishment is no impediment to beauty, but it is an obstacle tothe recovery of power.  Like all persons of real genius, Miladyknew what suited her nature and her means.  Poverty was repugnantto her; degradation took away two-thirds of her greatness.Milady was only a queen while among queens.  The pleasure ofsatisfied pride was necessary to her domination.  To commandinferior beings was rather a humiliation than a pleasure for her.She should certainly return from her exile--she did not doubtthat a single instant; but how long might this exile last?  Foran active, ambitious nature, like that of Milady, days not spentin climbing are inauspicious days.  What word, then, can be foundto describe the days which they occupy in descending?  To lose ayear, two years, three years, is to talk of an eternity; toreturn after the death or disgrace of the cardinal, perhaps; toreturn when D'Artagnan and his friends, happy and triumphant,should have received from the queen the reward they had wellacquired by the services they had rendered her--these weredevouring ideas that a woman like Milady could not endure.  Forthe rest, the storm which raged within her doubled her strength,and she would have burst the walls of her prison if her body hadbeen able to take for a single instant the proportions of hermind.

    Then that which spurred her on additionally in the midst of allthis was the remembrance of the cardinal.  What must themistrustful, restless, suspicious cardinal think of her silence--the cardinal, not merely her only support, her only prop, heronly protector at present, but still further, the principalinstrument of her future fortune and vengeance?  She knew him;she knew that at her return from a fruitless journey it would bein vain to tell him of her imprisonment, in vain to enlarge uponthe sufferings she had undergone.  The cardinal would reply, withthe sarcastic calmness of the skeptic, strong at once by powerand genius, "You should not have allowed yourself to be taken."Then Milady collected all her energies, murmuring in the depthsof her soul the name of Felton--the only beam of light thatpenetrated to her in the hell into which she had fallen; and likea serpent which folds and unfolds its rings to ascertain itsstrength, she enveloped Felton beforehand in the thousand meshesof her inventive imagination.

    Time, however, passed away; the hours, one after another, seemedto awaken the clock as they passed, and every blow of the brasshammer resounded upon the heart of the prisoner.  At nineo'clock, Lord de Winter made his customary visit, examined thewindow and the bars, sounded the floor and the walls, looked tothe chimney and the doors, without, during this long and minuteexamination, he or Milady pronouncing a single word.Doubtless both of them understood that the situation had becometoo serious to lose time in useless words and aimless wrath."Well," said the baron, on leaving her "you will not escapetonight!"

    At ten o'clock Felton came and placed the sentinel.  Miladyrecognized his step.  She was as well acquainted with it now as amistress is with that of the lover of her heart; and yet Miladyat the same time detested and despised this weak fanatic.That was not the appointed hour.  Felton did not enter.Two hours after, as midnight sounded, the sentinel was relieved.This time it WAS the hour, and from this moment Milady waitedwith impatience.  The new sentinel commenced his walk in thecorridor.  At the expiration of ten minutes Felton came.Milady was all attention.

    "Listen," said the young man to the sentinel.  "On no pretenseleave the door, for you know that last night my Lord punished asoldier for having quit his post for an instant, although I,during his absence, watched in his place."

    "Yes, I know it," said the soldier.

    "I recommend you therefore to keep the strictest watch.  For mypart I am going to pay a second visit to this woman, who I fearentertains sinister intentions upon her own life, and I havereceived orders to watch her."

    "Good!" murmured Milady; "the austere Puritan lies."As to the soldier, he only smiled.

    "Zounds, Lieutenant!" said he; "you are not unlucky in beingcharged with such commissions, particularly if my Lord hasauthorized you to look into her bed."

    Felton blushed.  Under any other circumstances he would havereprimanded the soldier for indulging in such pleasantry, but hisconscience murmured too loud for his mouth to dare speak."If I call, come," said he.  "If anyone comes, call me.""I will, Lieutenant," said the soldier.

    Felton entered Milady's apartment.  Milady arose."You are here!" said she.

    "I promised to come," said Felton, "and I have come.""You promised me something else."

    "What, my God!" said the young man, who in spite of his self-command felt his knees tremble and the sweat start from his brow."You promised to bring a knife, and to leave it with me after ourinterview."

    "Say no more of that, madame," said Felton.  "There is nosituation, however terrible it may be, which can authorize acreature of God to inflict death upon himself.  I have reflected,and I cannot, must not be guilty of such a sin."

    "Ah, you have reflected!" said the prisoner, sitting down in herarmchair, with a smile of disdain; "and I also have reflected.""Upon what?"

    "That I can have nothing to say to a man who does not keep hisword."

    "Oh, my God!" murmured Felton.

    "You may retire," said Milady.  "I will not talk.""Here is the knife," said Felton, drawing from his pocket theweapon which he had brought, according to his promise, but whichhe hesitated to give to his prisoner.

    "Let me see it," said Milady.

    "For what purpose?"

    "Upon my honor, I will instantly return it to you.  You shallplace it on that table, and you may remain between it and me."Felton offered the weapon to Milady, who examined the temper ofit attentively, and who tried the point on the tip of her finger."Well," said she, returning the knife to the young officer, "thisis fine and good steel.  You are a faithful friend, Felton."Felton took back the weapon, and laid it upon the table, as hehad agreed with the prisoner.

    Milady followed him with her eyes, and made a gesture ofsatisfaction.

    "Now," said she, "listen to me."

    The request was needless.  The young officer stood upright beforeher, awaiting her words as if to devour them.

    "Felton," said Milady, with a solemnity full of melancholy,"imagine that your sister, the daughter of your father, speaks toyou.  While yet young, unfortunately handsome, I was dragged intoa snare.  I resisted.  Ambushes and violences multiplied aroundme, but I resisted.  The religion I serve, the God I adore, wereblasphemed because I called upon that religion and that God, butstill I resisted.  Then outrages were heaped upon me, and as mysoul was not subdued they wished to defile my body forever.Finally--"

    Milady stopped, and a bitter smile passed over her lips."Finally," said Felton, "finally, what did they do?""At length, one evening my enemy resolved to paralyze theresistance he could not conquer.  One evening he mixed a powerfulnarcotic with my water.  Scarcely had I finished my repast, whenI felt myself sink by degrees into a strange torpor.  Although Iwas without mistrust, a vague fear seized me, and I tried tostruggle against sleepiness.  I arose.  I wished to run to thewindow and call for help, but my legs refused their office.  Itappeared as if the ceiling sank upon my head and crushed me withits weight.  I stretched out my arms.  I tried to speak.  I couldonly utter inarticulate sounds, and irresistible faintness cameover me.  I supported myself by a chair, feeling that I was aboutto fall, but this support was soon insufficient on account of myweak arms.  I fell upon one knee, then upon both.  I tried topray, but my tongue was frozen.  God doubtless neither heard norsaw me, and I sank upon the floor a prey to a slumber whichresembled death.

    "Of all that passed in that sleep, or the time which glided awaywhile it lasted, I have no remembrance.  The only thing Irecollect is that I awoke in bed in a round chamber, thefurniture of which was sumptuous, and into which light onlypenetrated by an opening in the ceiling.  No door gave entranceto the room.  It might be called a magnificent prison."It was a long time before I was able to make out what place Iwas in, or to take account of the details I describe.  My mindappeared to strive in vain to shake off the heavy darkness of thesleep from which I could not rouse myself.  I had vagueperceptions of space traversed, of the rolling of a carriage, ofa horrible dream in which my strength had become exhausted; butall this was so dark and so indistinct in my mind that theseevents seemed to belong to another life than mine, and yet mixedwith mine in fantastic duality.

    "At times the state into which I had fallen appeared so strangethat I believed myself dreaming.  I arose trembling.  My clotheswere near me on a chair; I neither remembered having undressedmyself nor going to bed.  Then by degrees the reality broke uponme, full of chaste terrors.  I was no longer in the house where Ihad dwelt.  As well as I could judge by the light of the sun, theday was already two-thirds gone.  It was the evening before whenI had fallen asleep; my sleep, then, must have lasted twenty-fourhours!  What had taken place during this long sleep?"I dressed myself as quickly as possible; my slow and stiffmotions all attested that the effects of the narcotic were notyet entirely dissipated.  The chamber was evidently furnished forthe reception of a woman; and the most finished coquette couldnot have formed a wish, but on casting her eyes about theapartment, she would have found that wish accomplished."Certainly I was not the first captive that had been shut up inthis splendid prison; but you may easily comprehend, Felton, thatthe more superb the prison, the greater was my terror."Yes, it was a prison, for I tried in vain to get out of it.  Isounded all the walls, in the hopes of discovering a door, buteverywhere the walls returned a full and flat sound."I made the tour of the room at least twenty times, in search ofan outlet of some kind; but there was none.  I sank exhaustedwith fatigue and terror into an armchair.

    "Meantime, night came on rapidly, and with night my terrorsincreased.  I did not know but I had better remain where I wasseated.  It appeared that I was surrounded with unknown dangersinto which I was about to fall at every instant.  Although I hadeaten nothing since the evening before, my fears prevented myfeeling hunger.

    "No noise from without by which I could measure the time reachedme; I only supposed it must be seven or eight o'clock in theevening, for it was in the month of October and it was quitedark.

    "All at once the noise of a door, turning on its hinges, made mestart.  A globe of fire appeared above the glazed opening of theceiling, casting a strong light into my chamber; and I perceivedwith terror that a man was standing within a few paces of me."A table, with two covers, bearing a supper ready prepared,stood, as if by magic, in the middle of the apartment."That man was he who had pursued me during a whole year, who hadvowed my dishonor, and who, by the first words that issued fromhis mouth, gave me to understand he had accomplished it thepreceding night."

    "Scoundrel!" murmured Felton.

    "Oh, yes, scoundrel!" cried Milady, seeing the interest which theyoung officer, whose soul seemed to hang on her lips, took inthis strange recital.  "Oh, yes, scoundrel!  He believed, havingtriumphed over me in my sleep, that all was completed.  He came,hoping that I would accept my shame, as my shame was consummated;he came to offer his fortune in exchange for my love."All that the heart of a woman could contain of haughty contemptand disdainful words, I poured out upon this man.  Doubtless hewas accustomed to such reproaches, for he listened to me calm andsmiling, with his arms crossed over his breast.  Then, when hethought I had said all, he advanced toward me; I sprang towardthe table, I seized a knife, I placed it to my breast."Take one step more," said I, "and in addition to my dishonor,you shall have my death to reproach yourself with.""There was, no doubt, in my look, my voice, my whole person, thatsincerity of gesture, of attitude, of accent, which carriesconviction to the most perverse minds, for he paused."'Your death?' said he; 'oh, no, you are too charming a mistressto allow me to consent to lose you thus, after I have had thehappiness to possess you only a single time.  Adieu, my charmer;I will wait to pay you my next visit till you are in a betterhumor.'

    "At these words he blew a whistle; the globe of fire whichlighted the room reascended and disappeared.  I found myselfagain in complete darkness.  The same noise of a door opening andshutting was repeated the instant afterward; the flaming globedescended afresh, and I was completely alone.

    "This moment was frightful; if I had any doubts as to mymisfortune, these doubts had vanished in an overwhelming reality.I was in the power of a man whom I not only detested, butdespised--of a man capable of anything, and who had already givenme a fatal proof of what he was able to do."

    "But who, then was this man?" asked Felton.

    "I passed the night on a chair, starting at the least noise, fortoward midnight the lamp went out, and I was again in darkness.But the night passed away without any fresh attempt on the partof my persecutor.  Day came; the table had disappeared, only Ihad still the knife in my hand.

    "This knife was my only hope.

    "I was worn out with fatigue.  Sleeplessness inflamed my eyes; Ihad not dared to sleep a single instant.  The light of dayreassured me; I went and threw myself on the bed, without partingwith the emancipating knife, which I concealed under my pillow."When I awoke, a fresh meal was served.

    "This time, in spite of my terrors, in spite of my agony, I beganto feel a devouring hunger.  It was forty-eight hours since I hadtaken any nourishment.  I ate some bread and some fruit; then,remembering the narcotic mixed with the water I had drunk, Iwould not touch that which was placed on the table, but filled myglass at a marble fountain fixed in the wall over my dressingtable.

    "And yet, notwithstanding these precautions, I remained for sometime in a terrible agitation of mind.  But my fears were thistime ill-founded; I passed the day without experiencing anythingof the kind I dreaded.

    "I took the precaution to half empty the carafe, in order that mysuspicions might not be noticed.

    "The evening came on, and with it darkness; but however profoundwas this darkness, my eyes began to accustom themselves to it.  Isaw, amid the shadows, the table sink through the floor; aquarter of an hour later it reappeared, bearing my supper.  In aninstant, thanks to the lamp, my chamber was once more lighted."I was determined to eat only such things as could not possiblyhave anything soporific introduced into them.  Two eggs and somefruit composed my repast; then I drew another glass of water frommy protecting fountain, and drank it.

    "At the first swallow, it appeared to me not to have the sametaste as in the morning.  Suspicion instantly seized me.  Ipaused, but I had already drunk half a glass.

    "I threw the rest away with horror, and waited, with the dew offear upon my brow.

    "No doubt some invisible witness had seen me draw the water fromthat fountain, and had taken advantage of my confidence in it,the better to assure my ruin, so coolly resolved upon, so cruellypursued.

    "Half an hour had not passed when the same symptoms began toappear; but as I had only drunk half a glass of the water, Icontended longer, and instead of falling entirely asleep, I sankinto a state of drowsiness which left me a perception of what waspassing around me, while depriving me of the strength either todefend myself or to fly.

    "I dragged myself toward the bed, to seek the only defense I hadleft--my saving knife; but I could not reach the bolster.  I sankon my knees, my hands clasped round one of the bedposts; then Ifelt that I was lost."

    Felton became frightfully pale, and a convulsive tremor creptthrough his whole body.

    "And what was most frightful," continued Milady, her voicealtered, as if she still experienced the same agony as at thatawful minute, "was that at this time I retained a consciousnessof the danger that threatened me; was that my soul, if I may sayso, waked in my sleeping body; was that I saw, that I heard.  Itis true that all was like a dream, but it was not the lessfrightful.

    "I saw the lamp ascend, and leave me in darkness; then I heardthe well-known creaking of the door although I had heard thatdoor open but twice.

    "I felt instinctively that someone approached me; it is said thatthe doomed wretch in the deserts of America thus feels theapproach of the serpent.

    "I wished to make an effort; I attempted to cry out.  By anincredible effort of will I even raised myself up, but only tosink down again immediately, and to fall into the arms of mypersecutor."

    "Tell me who this man was!" cried the young officer.Milady saw at a single glance all the painful feelings sheinspired in Felton by dwelling on every detail of her recital;but she would not spare him a single pang.  The more profoundlyshe wounded his heart, the more certainly he would avenge her.She continued, then, as if she had not heard his exclamation, oras if she thought the moment was not yet come to reply to it."Only this time it was no longer an inert body, without feeling,that the villain had to deal with.  I have told you that withoutbeing able to regain the complete exercise of my faculties, Iretained the sense of my danger.  I struggled, then, with all mystrength, and doubtless opposed, weak as I was, a longresistance, for I heard him cry out, 'These miserable Puritans!I knew very well that they tired out their executioners, but Idid not believe them so strong against their lovers!'"Alas! this desperate resistance could not last long.  I felt mystrength fail, and this time it was not my sleep that enabled thecoward to prevail, but my swoon."

    Felton listened without uttering any word or sound, except aninward expression of agony.  The sweat streamed down his marbleforehead, and his hand, under his coat, tore his breast."My first impulse, on coming to myself, was to feel under mypillow for the knife I had not been able to reach; if it had notbeen useful for defense, it might at least serve for expiation."But on taking this knife, Felton, a terrible idea occurred tome.  I have sworn to tell you all, and I will tell you all.  Ihave promised you the truth; I will tell it, were it to destroyme."

    "The idea came into your mind to avenge yourself on this man, didit not?" cried Felton.

    "Yes," said Milady.  "The idea was not that of a Christian, Iknew; but without doubt, that eternal enemy of our souls, thatlion roaring constantly around us, breathed it into my mind.  Inshort, what shall I say to you, Felton?" continued Milady, in thetone of a woman accusing herself of a crime.  "This idea occurredto me, and did not leave me; it is of this homicidal thought thatI now bear the punishment."

    "Continue, continue!" said Felton; "I am eager to see you attainyour vengeance!"

    "Oh, I resolved that it should take place as soon as possible.  Ihad no doubt he would return the following night.  During the dayI had nothing to fear.

    "When the hour of breakfast came, therefore, I did not hesitateto eat and drink.  I had determined to make believe sup, but toeat nothing.  I was forced, then, to combat the fast of theevening with the nourishment of the morning.

    "Only I concealed a glass of water, which remained after mybreakfast, thirst having been the chief of my sufferings when Iremained forty-eight hours without eating or drinking."The day passed away without having any other influence on methan to strengthen the resolution I had formed; only I took carethat my face should not betray the thoughts of my heart, for Ihad no doubt I was watched.  Several times, even, I felt a smileon my lips.  Felton, I dare not tell you at what idea I smiled;you would hold me in horror--"

    "Go on! go on!" said Felton; "you see plainly that I listen, andthat I am anxious to know the end."

    "Evening came; the ordinary events took place.  During thedarkness, as before, my supper was brought.  Then the lamp waslighted, and I sat down to table.  I only ate some fruit.  Ipretended to pour out water from the jug, but I only drank thatwhich I had saved in my glass.  The substitution was made socarefully that my spies, if I had any, could have no suspicion ofit.

    "After supper I exhibited the same marks of languor as on thepreceding evening; but this time, as I yielded to fatigue, or asif I had become familiarized with danger, I dragged myself towardmy bed, let my robe fall, and lay down.

    "I found my knife where I had placed it, under my pillow, andwhile feigning to sleep, my hand grasped the handle of itconvulsively.

    "Two hours passed away without anything fresh happening.  Oh, myGod! who could have said so the evening before?  I began to fearthat he would not come.

    "At length I saw the lamp rise softly, and disappear in thedepths of the ceiling; my chamber was filled with darkness andobscurity, but I made a strong effort to penetrate this darknessand obscurity.

    "Nearly ten minutes passed; I heard no other noise but thebeating of my own heart.  I implored heaven that he might come."At length I heard the well-known noise of the door, which openedand shut; I heard, notwithstanding the thickness of the carpet, astep which made the floor creak; I saw, notwithstanding thedarkness, a shadow which approached my bed."

    "Haste! haste!" said Felton; "do you not see that each of yourwords burns me like molten lead?"

    "Then," continued Milady, "then I collected all my strength; Irecalled to my mind that the moment of vengeance, or rather, ofjustice, had struck.  I looked upon myself as another Judith; Igathered myself up, my knife in my hand, and when I saw him nearme, stretching out his arms to find his victim, then, with thelast cry of agony and despair, I struck him in the middle of hisbreast.

    "The miserable villain!  He had foreseen all.  His breast wascovered with a coat-of-mail; the knife was bent against it."'Ah, ah!' cried he, seizing my arm, and wresting from me theweapon that had so badly served me, 'you want to take my life, doyou, my pretty Puritan?  But that's more than dislike, that'singratitude!  Come, come, calm yourself, my sweet girl!  Ithought you had softened.  I am not one of those tyrants whodetain women by force.  You don't love me.  With my usual fatuityI doubted it; now I am convinced.  Tomorrow you shall be free.'"I had but one wish; that was that he should kill me."'Beware!' said I, 'for my liberty is your dishonor.'"'Explain yourself, my pretty sibyl!'

    "'Yes; for as soon as I leave this place I will tell everything.I will proclaim the violence you have used toward me.  I willdescribe my captivity.  I will denounce this place of infamy.You are placed on high, my Lord, but tremble!  Above you there isthe king; above the king there is God!'

    "However perfect master he was over himself, my persecutorallowed a movement of anger to escape him.  I could not see theexpression of his countenance, but I felt the arm tremble uponwhich my hand was placed.

    "'Then you shall not leave this place,' said he.

    "'Very well,' cried I, 'then the place of my punishment will bethat of my tomb.  I will die here, and you will see if a phantomthat accuses is not more terrible than a living being thatthreatens!'

    "'You shall have no weapon left in your power.'

    "'There is a weapon which despair has placed within the reach ofevery creature who has the courage to use it.  I will allowmyself to die with hunger.'

    "'Come,' said the wretch, 'is not peace much better than such awar as that?  I will restore you to liberty this moment; I willproclaim you a piece of immaculate virtue; I will name you theLucretia of England.'

    "'And I will say that you are the Sextus.  I will denounce youbefore men, as I have denounced you before God; and if it benecessary that, like Lucretia, I should sign my accusation withmy blood, I will sign it.'

    "'Ah!' said my enemy, in a jeering tone, 'that's quite anotherthing.  My faith! everything considered, you are very well offhere.  You shall want for nothing, and if you let yourself die ofhunger that will be your own fault.'

    "At these words he retired.  I heard the door open and shut, andI remained overwhelmed, less, I confess it, by my grief than bythe mortification of not having avenged myself.

    "He kept his word.  All the day, all the next night passed awaywithout my seeing him again.  But I also kept my word with him,and I neither ate nor drank.  I was, as I told him, resolved todie of hunger.

    "I passed the day and the night in prayer, for I hoped that Godwould pardon me my suicide.

    "The second night the door opened; I was lying on the floor, formy strength began to abandon me.

    "At the noise I raised myself up on one hand.

    "'Well,' said a voice which vibrated in too terrible a manner inmy ear not to be recognized, 'well!  Are we softened a little?Will we not pay for our liberty with a single promise of silence?Come, I am a good sort of a prince,' added he, 'and although Ilike not Puritans I do them justice; and it is the same withPuritanesses, when they are pretty.  Come, take a little oath forme on the cross; I won't ask anything more of you.'"'On the cross,' cried I, rising, for at that abhorred voice Ihad recovered all my strength, 'on the cross I swear that nopromise, no menace, no force, no torture, shall close my mouth!On the cross I swear to denounce you everywhere as a murderer, asa thief of honor, as a base coward!  On the cross I swear, if Iever leave this place, to call down vengeance upon you from thewhole human race!'

    "'Beware!' said the voice, in a threatening accent that I hadnever yet heard.  'I have an extraordinary means which I will notemploy but in the last extremity to close your mouth, or at leastto prevent anyone from believing a word you may utter.'"I mustered all my strength to reply to him with a burst oflaughter.

    "He saw that it was a merciless war between us--a war to thedeath.

    "'Listen!' said he. 'I give you the rest of tonight and all daytomorrow.  Reflect:  promise to be silent, and riches,consideration, even honor, shall surround you; threaten to speak,and I will condemn you to infamy.'

    "'You?' cried I. 'You?'

    "'To interminable, ineffaceable infamy!'

    "'You?' repeated I.  Oh, I declare to you, Felton, I thought himmad!

    "'Yes, yes, I!' replied he.

    "'Oh, leave me!' said I. 'Begone, if you do not desire to see medash my head against that wall before your eyes!'"'Very well, it is your own doing.  Till tomorrow evening, then!'"'Till tomorrow evening, then!' replied I, allowing myself tofall, and biting the carpet with rage."

    Felton leaned for support upon a piece of furniture; and Miladysaw, with the joy of a demon, that his strength would fail himperhaps before the end of her recital.

    57  MEANS FOR CLASSICAL TRAGEDY

    After a moment of silence employed by Milady in observing theyoung man who listened to her, Milady continued her recital."It was nearly three days since I had eaten or drunk anything.  Isuffered frightful torments.  At times there passed before meclouds which pressed my brow, which veiled my eyes; this wasdelirium.

    "When the evening came I was so weak that every time I fainted Ithanked God, for I thought I was about to die.

    "In the midst of one of these swoons I heard the door open.Terror recalled me to myself.

    "He entered the apartment followed by a man in a mask.  He wasmasked likewise; but I knew his step, I knew his voice, I knewhim by that imposing bearing which hell has bestowed upon hisperson for the curse of humanity.

    "'Well,' said he to me, 'have you made your mind up to take theoath I requested of you?'

    "'You have said Puritans have but one word.  Mine you have heard,and that is to pursue you--on earth to the tribunal of men, inheaven to the tribunal of God.'

    "'You persist, then?'

    "'I swear it before the God who hears me.  I will take the wholeworld as a witness of your crime, and that until I have found anavenger.'

    "'You are a prostitute,' said he, in a voice of thunder, 'and youshall undergo the punishment of prostitutes!  Branded in the eyesof the world you invoke, try to prove to that world that you areneither guilty nor mad!'

    "Then, addressing the man who accompanied him, 'Executioner,'said he, 'do your duty.'"

    "Oh, his name, his name!" cried Felton.  "His name, tell it me!""Then in spite of my cries, in spite of my resistance--for Ibegan to comprehend that there was a question of something worsethan death--the executioner seized me, threw me on the floor,fastened me with his bonds, and suffocated by sobs, almostwithout sense, invoking God, who did not listen to me, I utteredall at once a frightful cry of pain and shame.  A burning fire, ared-hot iron, the iron of the executioner, was imprinted on myshoulder."

    Felton uttered a groan.

    "Here," said Milady, rising with the majesty of a queen, "here,Felton, behold the new martyrdom invented for a pure young girl,the victim of the brutality of a villain.  Learn to know theheart of men, and henceforth make yourself less easily theinstrument of their unjust vengeance."

    Milady, with a rapid gesture, opened her robe, tore the cambricthat covered her bosom, and red with feigned anger and simulatedshame, showed the young man the ineffaceable impression whichdishonored that beautiful shoulder.

    "But," cried Felton, "that is a FLEUR-DE-LIS which I see there.""And therein consisted the infamy," replied Milady.  "The brandof England!--it would be necessary to prove what tribunal hadimposed it on me, and I could have made a public appeal to allthe tribunals of the kingdom; but the brand of France!--oh, bythat, by THAT I was branded indeed!"

    This was too much for Felton.

    Pale, motionless, overwhelmed by this frightful revelation,dazzled by the superhuman beauty of this woman who unveiledherself before him with an immodesty which appeared to himsublime, he ended by falling on his knees before her as the earlyChristians did before those pure and holy martyrs whom thepersecution of the emperors gave up in the circus to thesanguinary sensuality of the populace.  The brand disappeared;the beauty alone remained.

    "Pardon!  Pardon!" cried Felton, "oh, pardon!"

    Milady read in his eyes LOVE! LOVE!

    "Pardon for what?" asked she.

    "Pardon me for having joined with your persecutors."Milady held out her hand to him.

    "So beautiful! so young!" cried Felton, covering that hand withhis kisses.

    Milady let one of those looks fall upon him which make a slave ofa king.

    Felton was a Puritan; he abandoned the hand of this woman to kissher feet.

    He no longer loved her; he adored her.

    When this crisis was past, when Milady appeared to have resumedher self-possession, which she had never lost; when Felton hadseen her recover with the veil of chastity those treasures oflove which were only concealed from him to make him desire themthe more ardently, he said, "Ah, now!  I have only one thing toask of you; that is, the name of your true executioner.  For tome there is but one; the other was an instrument, that was all.""What, brother!" cried Milady, "must I name him again?  Have younot yet divined who he is?"

    "What?" cried Felton, "he--again he--always he?  What--the trulyguilty?"

    "The truly guilty," said Milady, "is the ravager of England, thepersecutor of true believers, the base ravisher of the honor ofso many women--he who, to satisfy a caprice of his corrupt heart,is about to make England shed so much blood, who protects theProtestants today and will betray them tomorrow--""Buckingham!  It is, then, Buckingham!" cried Felton, in a highstate of excitement.

    Milady concealed her face in her hands, as if she could notendure the shame which this name recalled to her."Buckingham, the executioner of this angelic creature!" criedFelton.  "And thou hast not hurled thy thunder at him, my God!And thou hast left him noble, honored, powerful, for the ruin ofus all!"

    "God abandons him who abandons himself," said Milady."But he will draw upon his head the punishment reserved for thedamned!" said Felton, with increasing exultation.  "He wills thathuman vengeance should precede celestial justice.""Men fear him and spare him."

    "I," said Felton, "I do not fear him, nor will I spare him."The soul of Milady was bathed in an infernal joy."But how can Lord de Winter, my protector, my father," askedFelton, "possibly be mixed up with all this?"

    "Listen, Felton," resumed Milady, "for by the side of base andcontemptible men there are often found great and generousnatures.  I had an affianced husband, a man whom I loved, and wholoved me--a heart like yours, Felton, a man like you.  I went tohim and told him all; he knew me, that man did, and did not doubtan instant.  He was a nobleman, a man equal to Buckingham inevery respect.  He said nothing; he only girded on his sword,wrapped himself in his cloak, and went straight to BuckinghamPalace.

    "Yes, yes," said Felton; "I understand how he would act.  Butwith such men it is not the sword that should be employed; it isthe poniard."

    "Buckingham had left England the day before, sent as ambassadorto Spain, to demand the hand of the Infanta for King Charles I,who was then only Prince of Wales.  My affianced husbandreturned.

    "'Hear me,' said he; 'this man has gone, and for the moment hasconsequently escaped my vengeance; but let us be united, as wewere to have been, and then leave it to Lord de Winter tomaintain his own honor and that of his wife.'"

    "Lord de Winter!" cried Felton.

    "Yes," said Milady, "Lord de Winter; and now you can understandit all, can you not?  Buckingham remained nearly a year absent.A week before his return Lord de Winter died, leaving me his soleheir.  Whence came the blow?  God who knows all, knows withoutdoubt; but as for me, I accuse nobody."

    "Oh, what an abyss; what an abyss!" cried Felton."Lord de Winter died without revealing anything to his brother.The terrible secret was to be concealed till it burst, like aclap of thunder, over the head of the guilty.  Your protector hadseen with pain this marriage of his elder brother with aportionless girl.  I was sensible that I could look for nosupport from a man disappointed in his hopes of an inheritance.I went to France, with a determination to remain there for therest of my life.  But all my fortune is in England.Communication being closed by the war, I was in want ofeverything.  I was then obliged to come back again.  Six daysago, I landed at Portsmouth."

    "Well?" said Felton.

    "Well; Buckingham heard by some means, no doubt, of my return.He spoke of me to Lord de Winter, already prejudiced against me,and told him that his sister-in-law was a prostitute, a brandedwoman.  The noble and pure voice of my husband was no longer hereto defend me.  Lord de Winter believed all that was told him withso much the more ease that it was his interest to believe it.  Hecaused me to be arrested, had me conducted hither, and placed meunder your guard.  You know the rest.  The day after tomorrow hebanishes me, he transports me; the day after tomorrow he exilesme among the infamous.  Oh, the train is well laid; the plot isclever.  My honor will not survive it!  You see, then, Felton, Ican do nothing but die.  Felton, give me that knife!"And at these words, as if all her strength was exhausted, Miladysank, weak and languishing, into the arms of the young officer,who, intoxicated with love, anger, and voluptuous sensationshitherto unknown, received her with transport, pressed heragainst his heart, all trembling at the breath from that charmingmouth, bewildered by the contact with that palpitating bosom."No, no," said he.  "No, you shall live honored and pure; youshall live to triumph over your enemies."

    Milady put him from her slowly with her hand, while drawing himnearer with her look; but Felton, in his turn, embraced her moreclosely, imploring her like a divinity.

    "Oh, death, death!" said she, lowering her voice and her eyelids,"oh, death, rather than shame!  Felton, my brother, my friend, Iconjure you!"

    "No," cried Felton, "no; you shall live and you shall beavenged."

    "Felton, I bring misfortune to all who surround me!  Felton,abandon me!  Felton, let me die!"

    "Well, then, we will live and die together!" cried he, pressinghis lips to those of the prisoner.

    Several strokes resounded on the door; this time Milady reallypushed him away from her.

    "Hark," said she, "we have been overheard!  Someone is coming!All is over!  We are lost!"

    "No," said Felton; it is only the sentinel warning me that theyare about to change the guard."

    "Then run to the door, and open it yourself."

    Felton obeyed; this woman was now his whole thought, his wholesoul.

    He found himself face to face with a sergeant commanding a watch-patrol.

    "Well, what is the matter?" asked the young lieutenant."You told me to open the door if I heard anyone cry out," saidthe soldier; "but you forgot to leave me the key.  I heard youcry out, without understanding what you said.  I tried to openthe door, but it was locked inside; then I called the sergeant.""And here I am," said the sergeant.

    Felton, quite bewildered, almost mad, stood speechless.Milady plainly perceived that it was now her turn to take part inthe scene.  She ran to the table, and seizing the knife whichFelton had laid down, exclaimed, "And by what right will youprevent me from dying?"

    "Great God!" exclaimed Felton, on seeing the knife glitter in herhand.

    At that moment a burst of ironical laughter resounded through thecorridor.  The baron, attracted by the noise, in his chambergown, his sword under his arm, stood in the doorway."Ah," said he, "here we are, at the last act of the tragedy.  Yousee, Felton, the drama has gone through all the phases I named;but be easy, no blood will flow."

    Milady perceived that all was lost unless she gave Felton animmediate and terrible proof of her courage.

    "You are mistaken, my Lord, blood will flow; and may that bloodfall back on those who cause it to flow!"

    Felton uttered a cry, and rushed toward her.  He was too late;Milady had stabbed herself.

    But the knife had fortunately, we ought to say skillfully, comein contact with the steel busk, which at that period, like acuirass, defended the chests of women.  It had glided down it,tearing the robe, and had penetrated slantingly between the fleshand the ribs.  Milady's robe was not the less stained with bloodin a second.

    Milady fell down, and seemed to be in a swoon.

    Felton snatched away the knife.

    "See, my Lord," said he, in a deep, gloomy tone, "here is a womanwho was under my guard, and who has killed herself!""Be at ease, Felton," said Lord de Winter.  "She is not dead;demons do not die so easily.  Be tranquil, and go wait for me inmy chamber."

    "But, my Lord--"

    "Go, sir, I command you!"

    At this injunction from his superior, Felton obeyed; but in goingout, he put the knife into his bosom.

    As to Lord de Winter, he contented himself with calling the womanwho waited on Milady, and when she was come, he recommended theprisoner, who was still fainting, to her care, and left themalone.

    Meanwhile, all things considered and notwithstanding hissuspicions, as the wound might be serious, he immediately sentoff a mounted man to find a physician.

    58  ESCAPE

    As Lord de Winter had thought, Milady's wound was not dangerous.So soon as she was left alone with the woman whom the baron hadsummoned to her assistance she opened her eyes.

    It was, however, necessary to affect weakness and pain--not avery difficult task for so finished an actress as Milady.  Thusthe poor woman was completely the dupe of the prisoner, whom,notwithstanding her hints, she persisted in watching all night.But the presence of this woman did not prevent Milady fromthinking.

    There was no longer a doubt that Felton was convinced; Felton washers.  If an angel appeared to that young man as an accuser ofMilady, he would take him, in the mental disposition in which henow found himself, for a messenger sent by the devil.Milady smiled at this thought, for Felton was now her only hope--her only means of safety.

    But Lord de Winter might suspect him; Felton himself might now bewatched!

    Toward four o'clock in the morning the doctor arrived; but sincethe time Milady stabbed herself, however short, the wound hadclosed.  The doctor could therefore measure neither the directionnor the depth of it; he only satisfied himself by Milady's pulsethat the case was not serious.

    In the morning Milady, under the pretext that she had not sleptwell in the night and wanted rest, sent away the woman whoattended her.

    She had one hope, which was that Felton would appear at thebreakfast hour; but Felton did not come.

    Were her fears realized?  Was Felton, suspected by the baron,about to fail her at the decisive moment?  She had only one dayleft.  Lord de Winter had announced her embarkation for thetwenty-third, and it was now the morning of the twenty-second.Nevertheless she still waited patiently till the hour for dinner.Although she had eaten nothing in the morning, the dinner wasbrought in at its usual time.  Milady then perceived, withterror, that the uniform of the soldiers who guarded her waschanged.

    Then she ventured to ask what had become of Felton.She was told that he had left the castle an hour before onhorseback.  She inquired if the baron was still at the castle.The soldier replied that he was, and that he had given orders tobe informed if the prisoner wished to speak to him.Milady replied that she was too weak at present, and that heronly desire was to be left alone.

    The soldier went out, leaving the dinner served.

    Felton was sent away.  The marines were removed.  Felton was thenmistrusted.

    This was the last blow to the prisoner.

    Left alone, she arose.  The bed, which she had kept from prudenceand that they might believe her seriously wounded, burned herlike a bed of fire.  She cast a glance at the door; the baron hadhad a plank nailed over the grating.  He no doubt feared that bythis opening she might still by some diabolical means corrupt herguards.

    Milady smiled with joy.  She was free now to give way to hertransports without being observed.  She traversed her chamberwith the excitement of a furious maniac or of a tigress shut upin an iron cage.  CERTES, if the knife had been left in herpower, she would now have thought, not of killing herself, but ofkilling the baron.

    At six o'clock Lord de Winter came in.  He was armed at allpoints.  This man, in whom Milady till that time had only seen avery simple gentleman, had become an admirable jailer.  Heappeared to foresee all, to divine all, to anticipate all.A single look at Milady apprised him of all that was passing inher mind.

    "Ay,!" said he, "I see; but you shall not kill me today.  Youhave no longer a weapon; and besides, I am on my guard.  You hadbegun to pervert my poor Felton.  He was yielding to yourinfernal influence; but I will save him.  He will never see youagain; all is over.  Get your clothes together.  Tomorrow youwill go.  I had fixed the embarkation for the twenty-fourth; butI have reflected that the more promptly the affair takes placethe more sure it will be.  Tomorrow, by twelve o'clock, I shallhave the order for your exile, signed, BUCKINGHAM.  If youspeak a single word to anyone before going aboard ship, mysergeant will blow your brains out.  He has orders to do so.  Ifwhen on the ship you speak a single word to anyone before thecaptain permits you, the captain will have you thrown into thesea.  That is agreed upon.

    "AU REVOIR; then; that is all I have to say today.  Tomorrow Iwill see you again, to take my leave."  With these words thebaron went out.  Milady had listened to all this menacing tiradewith a smile of disdain on her lips, but rage in her heart.Supper was served.  Milady felt that she stood in need of all herstrength.  She did not know what might take place during thisnight which approached so menacingly--for large masses of cloudrolled over the face of the sky, and distant lightning announceda storm.

    The storm broke about ten o'clock.  Milady felt a consolation inseeing nature partake of the disorder of her heart.  The thundergrowled in the air like the passion and anger in her thoughts.It appeared to her that the blast as it swept along disheveledher brow, as it bowed the branches of the trees and bore awaytheir leaves.  She howled as the hurricane howled; and her voicewas lost in the great voice of nature, which also seemed to groanwith despair.

    All at once she heard a tap at her window, and by the help of aflash of lightning she saw the face of a man appear behind thebars.

    She ran to the window and opened it.

    "Felton!" cried she.  "I am saved."

    "Yes," said Felton; "but silence, silence!  I must have time tofile through these bars.  Only take care that I am not seenthrough the wicket."

    "Oh, it is a proof that the Lord is on our side, Felton," repliedMilady.  "They have closed up the grating with a board.""That is well; God has made them senseless," said Felton."But what must I do?" asked Milady.

    "Nothing, nothing, only shut the window.  Go to bed, or at leastlie down in your clothes.  As soon as I have done I will knock onone of the panes of glass.  But will you be able to follow me?""Oh, yes!"

    "Your wound?"

    "Gives me pain, but will not prevent my walking.""Be ready, then, at the first signal."

    Milady shut the window, extinguished the lamp, and went, asFelton had desired her, to lie down on the bed.  Amid the moaningof the storm she heard the grinding of the file upon the bars,and by the light of every flash she perceived the shadow ofFelton through the panes.

    She passed an hour without breathing, panting, with a cold sweatupon her brow, and her heart oppressed by frightful agony atevery movement she heard in the corridor.

    There are hours which last a year.

    At the expiration of an hour, Felton tapped again.Milady sprang out of bed and opened the window.  Two bars removedformed an opening for a man to pass through.

    "Are you ready?" asked Felton.

    "Yes.  Must I take anything with me?"

    "Money, if you have any."

    "Yes; fortunately they have left me all I had."

    "So much the better, for I have expended all mine in chartering avessel."

    "Here!" said Milady, placing a bag full of louis in Felton'shands.

    Felton took the bag and threw it to the foot of the wall."Now," said he, "will you come?"

    "I am ready."

    Milady mounted upon a chair and passed the upper part of her bodythrough the window.  She saw the young officer suspended over theabyss by a ladder of ropes.  For the first time an emotion ofterror reminded her that she was a woman.

    The dark space frightened her.

    "I expected this," said Felton.

    "It's nothing, it's nothing!" said Milady.  "I will descend withmy eyes shut."

    "Have you confidence in me?" said Felton.

    "You ask that?"

    "Put your two hands together.  Cross them; that's right!"Felton tied her two wrists together with his handkerchief, andthen with a cord over the handkerchief.

    "What are you doing?" asked Milady, with surprise."Pass your arms around my neck, and fear nothing.""But I shall make you lose your balance, and we shall both bedashed to pieces."

    "Don't be afraid.  I am a sailor."

    Not a second was to be lost.  Milady passed her two arms roundFelton's neck, and let herself slip out of the window.  Feltonbegan to descend the ladder slowly, step by step.  Despite theweight of two bodies, the blast of the hurricane shook them inthe air.

    All at once Felton stopped.

    "What is the matter?" asked Milady.

    "Silence," said Felton, "I hear footsteps."

    "We are discovered!"

    There was a silence of several seconds.

    "No," said Felton, "it is nothing."

    "But what, then, is the noise?"

    "That of the patrol going their rounds."

    "Where is their road?"

    "Just under us."

    "They will discover us!"

    "No, if it does not lighten."

    "But they will run against the bottom of the ladder.""Fortunately it is too short by six feet."

    "Here they are!  My God!"

    "Silence!"

    Both remained suspended, motionless and breathless, within twentypaces of the ground, while the patrol passed beneath themlaughing and talking.  This was a terrible moment for thefugitives.

    The patrol passed.  The noise of their retreating footsteps andthe murmur of their voices soon died away.

    "Now," said Felton, "we are safe."

    Milady breathed a deep sigh and fainted.

    Felton continued to descend.  Near the bottom of the ladder, whenhe found no more support for his feet, he clung with his hands;at length, arrived at the last step, he let himself hang by thestrength of his wrists, and touched the ground.  He stooped down,picked up the bag of money, and placed it between his teeth.Then he took Milady in his arms, and set off briskly in thedirection opposite to that which the patrol had taken.  He soonleft the pathway of the patrol, descended across the rocks, andwhen arrived on the edge of the sea, whistled.

    A similar signal replied to him; and five minutes after, a boatappeared, rowed by four men.

    The boat approached as near as it could to the shore; but therewas not depth enough of water for it to touch land.  Feltonwalked into the sea up to his middle, being unwilling to trusthis precious burden to anybody.

    Fortunately the storm began to subside, but still the sea wasdisturbed.  The little boat bounded over the waves like a nut-shell.

    "To the sloop," said Felton, "and row quickly."

    The four men bent to their oars, but the sea was too high to letthem get much hold of it.

    However, they left the castle behind; that was the principalthing.  The night was extremely dark.  It was almost impossibleto see the shore from the boat; they would therefore be lesslikely to see the boat from the shore.

    A black point floated on the sea.  That was the sloop.  While theboat was advancing with all the speed its four rowers could giveit, Felton untied the cord and then the handkerchief which boundMilady's hands together.  When her hands were loosed he took somesea water and sprinkled it over her face.

    Milady breathed a sigh, and opened her eyes.

    "Where am I?" said she.

    "Saved!" replied the young officer.

    "Oh, saved, saved!" cried she.  "Yes, there is the sky; here isthe sea!  The air I breathe is the air of liberty!  Ah, thanks,Felton, thanks!"

    The young man pressed her to his heart.

    "But what is the matter with my hands!" asked Milady; "it seemsas if my wrists had been crushed in a vice."

    Milady held out her arms; her wrists were bruised."Alas!" said Felton, looking at those beautiful hands, andshaking his head sorrowfully.

    "Oh, it's nothing, nothing!" cried Milady.  "I remember now."Milady looked around her, as if in search of something."It is there," said Felton, touching the bag of money with hisfoot.

    They drew near to the sloop.  A sailor on watch hailed the boat;the boat replied.

    "What vessel is that?" asked Milady.

    "The one I have hired for you."

    "Where will it take me?"

    "Where you please, after you have put me on shore at Portsmouth.""What are you going to do at Portsmouth?" asked Milady."Accomplish the orders of Lord de Winter," said Felton, with agloomy smile.

    "What orders?" asked Milady.

    "You do not understand?" asked Felton.

    "No; explain yourself, I beg."

    "As he mistrusted me, he determined to guard you himself, andsent me in his place to get Buckingham to sign the order for yourtransportation."

    "But if he mistrusted you, how could he confide such an order toyou?"

    "How could I know what I was the bearer of?"

    "That's true!  And you are going to Portsmouth?"

    "I have no time to lose.  Tomorrow is the twenty-third, andBuckingham sets sail tomorrow with his fleet."

    "He sets sail tomorrow!  Where for?"

    "For La Rochelle."

    "He need not sail!" cried Milady, forgetting her usual presenceof mind.

    "Be satisfied," replied Felton; "he will not sail."Milady started with joy.  She could read to the depths of theheart of this young man; the death of Buckingham was writtenthere at full length.

    "Felton," cried she, "you are as great as Judas Maccabeus!  Ifyou die, I will die with you; that is all I can say to you.""Silence!" cried Felton; "we are here."

    In fact, they touched the sloop.

    Felton mounted the ladder first, and gave his hand to Milady,while the sailors supported her, for the sea was still muchagitated.

    An instant after they were on the deck.

    "Captain," said Felton, "this is person of whom I spoke to you,and whom you must convey safe and sound to France.""For a thousand pistoles," said the captain.

    "I have paid you five hundred of them."

    "That's correct," said the captain.

    "And here are the other five hundred," replied Milady, placingher hand upon the bag of gold.

    "No," said the captain, "I make but one bargain; and I haveagreed with this young man that the other five hundred shall notbe due to me till we arrive at Boulogne."

    "And shall we arrive there?"

    "Safe and sound, as true as my name's Jack Butler.""Well," said Milady, "if you keep your word, instead of fivehundred, I will give you a thousand pistoles."

    "Hurrah for you, then, my beautiful lady," cried the captain;"and may God often send me such passengers as your Ladyship!""Meanwhile," said Felton, "convey me to the little bay of--; youknow it was agreed you should put in there."

    The captain replied by ordering the necessary maneuvers, andtoward seven o'clock in the morning the little vessel cast anchorin the bay that had been named.

    During this passage, Felton related everything to Milady--how,instead of going to London, he had chartered the little vessel;how he had returned; how he had scaled the wall by fasteningcramps in the interstices of the stones, as he ascended, to givehim foothold; and how, when he had reached the bars, he fastenedhis ladder.  Milady knew the rest.

    On her side, Milady tried to encourage Felton in his project; butat the first words which issued from her mouth, she plainly sawthat the young fanatic stood more in need of being moderated thanurged.

    It was agreed that Milady should wait for Felton till teno'clock; if he did not return by ten o'clock she was to sail.In that case, and supposing he was at liberty, he was to rejoinher in France, at the convent of the Carmelites at Bethune.

    59  WHAT TOOK PLACE AT PORTSMOUTH AUGUST 23, 1628Felton took leave of Milady as a brother about to go for a mere walktakes leave of his sister, kissing her hand.

    His whole body appeared in its ordinary state of calmness, only anunusual fire beamed from his eyes, like the effects of a fever; his browwas more pale than it generally was; his teeth were clenched, and hisspeech had a short dry accent which indicated that something dark was atwork within him.

    As long as he remained in the boat which conveyed him to land, he kepthis face toward Milady, who, standing on the deck, followed him with hereyes.  Both were free from the fear of pursuit; nobody ever came intoMilady's apartment before nine o'clock, and it would require three hoursto go from the castle to London.

    Felton jumped onshore, climbed the little ascent which led to the top ofthe cliff, saluted Milady a last time, and took his course toward thecity.

    At the end of a hundred paces, the ground began to decline, and he couldonly see the mast of the sloop.

    He immediately ran in the direction of Portsmouth, which he saw atnearly half a league before him, standing out in the haze of themorning, with its houses and towers.

    Beyond Portsmouth the sea was covered with vessels whose masts, like aforest of poplars despoiled by the winter, bent with each breath of thewind.

    Felton, in his rapid walk, reviewed in his mind all the accusationsagainst the favorite of James I and Charles I, furnished by two years ofpremature meditation and a long sojourn among the Puritans.When he compared the public crimes of this minister--startling crimes,European crimes, if so we may say--with the private and unknown crimeswith which Milady had charged him, Felton found that the more culpableof the two men which formed the character of Buckingham was the one ofwhom the public knew not the life.  This was because his love, sostrange, so new, and so ardent, made him view the infamous and imaginaryaccusations of Milady de Winter as, through a magnifying glass, oneviews as frightful monsters atoms in reality imperceptible by the sideof an ant.

    The rapidity of his walk heated his blood still more; the idea that heleft behind him, exposed to a frightful vengeance, the woman he loved,or rather whom he adored as a saint, the emotion he had experienced,present fatigue--all together exalted his mind above human feeling.He entered Portsmouth about eight o'clock in the morning.  The wholepopulation was on foot; drums were beating in the streets and in theport; the troops about to embark were marching toward the sea.Felton arrived at the palace of the Admiralty, covered with dust, andstreaming with perspiration.  His countenance, usually so pale, waspurple with heat and passion.  The sentinel wanted to repulse him; butFelton called to the officer of the post, and drawing from his pocketthe letter of which he was the bearer, he said, "A pressing message fromLord de Winter."

    At the name of Lord de Winter, who was known to be one of his Grace'smost intimate friends, the officer of the post gave orders to let Feltonpass, who, besides, wore the uniform of a naval officer.Felton darted into the palace.

    At the moment he entered the vestibule, another man was enteringlikewise, dusty, out of breath, leaving at the gate a post horse, which,on reaching the palace, tumbled on his foreknees.Felton and he addressed Patrick, the duke's confidential lackey, at thesame moment.  Felton named Lord de Winter; the unknown would not nameanybody, and pretended that it was to the duke alone he would makehimself known.  Each was anxious to gain admission before the other.Patrick, who knew Lord de Winter was in affairs of the service, and inrelations of friendship with the duke, gave the preference to the onewho came in his name.  The other was forced to wait, and it was easilyto be seen how he cursed the delay.

    The valet led Felton through a large hall in which waited the deputiesfrom La Rochelle, headed by the Prince de Soubise, and introduced himinto a closet where Buckingham, just out of the bath, was finishing histoilet, upon which, as at all times, he bestowed extraordinaryattention.

    "Lieutenant Felton, from Lord de Winter," said Patrick."From Lord de Winter!" repeated Buckingham; "let him come in."Felton entered.  At that moment Buckingham was throwing upon a couch arich toilet robe, worked with gold, in order to put on a blue velvetdoublet embroidered with pearls.

    "Why didn't the baron come himself?" demanded Buckingham.  "I expectedhim this morning."

    "He desired me to tell your Grace," replied Felton, "that he very muchregretted not having that honor, but that he was prevented by the guardhe is obliged to keep at the castle."

    "Yes, I know that," said Buckingham; "he has a prisoner.""It is of that prisoner that I wish to speak to your Grace," repliedFelton.

    "Well, then, speak!"

    "That which I have to say of her can only be heard by yourself, myLord!"

    "Leave us, Patrick," said Buckingham; "but remain within sound of thebell.  I shall call you presently."

    Patrick went out.

    "We are alone, sir," said Buckingham; "speak!"

    "My Lord," said Felton, "the Baron de Winter wrote to you the other dayto request you to sign an order of embarkation relative to a young womannamed Charlotte Backson."

    "Yes, sir; and I answered him, to bring or send me that order and Iwould sign it."

    "Here it is, my Lord."

    "Give it to me," said the duke.

    And taking it from Felton, he cast a rapid glance over the paper, andperceiving that it was the one that had been mentioned to him, he placedit on the table, took a pen, and prepared to sign it."Pardon, my Lord," said Felton, stopping the duke; "but does your Graceknow that the name of Charlotte Backson is not the true name of thisyoung woman?"

    "Yes, sir, I know it," replied the duke, dipping the quill in the ink."Then your Grace knows her real name?" asked Felton, in a sharp tone."I know it"; and the duke put the quill to the paper.  Felton grew pale."And knowing that real name, my Lord," replied Felton, "will you sign itall the same?"

    "Doubtless," said Buckingham, "and rather twice than once.""I cannot believe," continued Felton, in a voice that became more sharpand rough, "that your Grace knows that it is to Milady de Winter thisrelates."

    "I know it perfectly, although I am astonished that you know it.""And will your Grace sign that order without remorse?"Buckingham looked at the young man haughtily.

    "Do you know, sir, that you are asking me very strange questions, andthat I am very foolish to answer them?"

    "Reply to them, my Lord," said Felton; "the circumstances are moreserious than you perhaps believe."

    Buckingham reflected that the young man, coming from Lord de Winter,undoubtedly spoke in his name, and softened.

    "Without remorse," said he.  "The baron knows, as well as myself, thatMilady de Winter is a very guilty woman, and it is treating her veryfavorably to commute her punishment to transportation."The duke put his pen to the paper.

    "You will not sign that order, my Lord!" said Felton, making a steptoward the duke.

    "I will not sign this order!  And why not?"

    "Because you will look into yourself, and you will do justice to thelady."

    "I should do her justice by sending her to Tyburn," said Buckingham."This lady is infamous."

    "My Lord, Milady de Winter is an angel; you know that she is, and Idemand her liberty of you."

    "Bah!  Are you mad, to talk to me thus?" said Buckingham."My Lord, excuse me!  I speak as I can; I restrain myself.  But, myLord, think of what you're about to do, and beware of going too far!""What do you say?  God pardon me!" cried Buckingham, "I really think hethreatens me!"

    "No, my Lord, I still plead.  And I say to you:  one drop of watersuffices to make the full vase overflow; one slight fault may draw downpunishment upon the head spared, despite many crimes.""Mr. Felton," said Buckingham, "you will withdraw, and place yourself atonce under arrest."

    "You will hear me to the end, my Lord.  You have seduced this younggirl; you have outraged, defiled her.  Repair your crimes toward her;let her go free, and I will exact nothing else from you.""You will exact!" said Buckingham, looking at Felton with astonishment,and dwelling upon each syllable of the three words as he pronouncedthem.

    "My Lord," continued Felton, becoming more excited as he spoke, "myLord, beware!  All England is tired of your iniquities; my Lord, youhave abused the royal power, which you have almost usurped; my Lord, youare held in horror by God and men.  God will punish you hereafter, but Iwill punish you here!"

    "Ah, this is too much!" cried Buckingham, making a step toward the door.Felton barred his passage.

    "I ask it humbly of you, my Lord" said he; "sign the order for theliberation of Milady de Winter.  Remember that she is a woman whom youhave dishonored."

    "Withdraw, sir," said Buckingham, "or I will call my attendant, and haveyou placed in irons."

    "You shall not call," said Felton, throwing himself between the duke andthe bell placed on a stand encrusted with silver.  "Beware, my Lord, youare in the hands of God!"

    "In the hands of the devil, you mean!" cried Buckingham, raising hisvoice so as to attract the notice of his people, without absolutelyshouting.

    "Sign, my Lord; sign the liberation of Milady de Winter," said Felton,holding out  paper to the duke.

    "By force? You are joking!  Holloa, Patrick!"

    "Sign, my Lord!"

    "Never."

    "Never?"

    "Help!" shouted the duke; and at the same time he sprang toward hissword.

    But Felton did not give him time to draw it.  He held the knife withwhich Milady had stabbed herself, open in his bosom; at one bound he wasupon the duke.

    At that moment Patrick entered the room, crying, "A letter from France,my Lord."

    "From France!" cried Buckingham, forgetting everything in thinking fromwhom that letter came.

    Felton took advantage of this moment, and plunged the knife into hisside up to the handle.

    "Ah, traitor," cried Buckingham, "you have killed me!""Murder!" screamed Patrick.

    Felton cast his eyes round for means of escape, and seeing the doorfree, he rushed into the next chamber, in which, as we have said, thedeputies from La Rochelle were waiting, crossed it as quickly aspossible, and rushed toward the staircase; but upon the first step hemet Lord de Winter, who, seeing him pale, confused, livid, and stainedwith blood both on his hands and face, seized him by the throat, crying,"I knew it!  I guessed it!  But too late by a minute, unfortunate,unfortunate that I am!"

    Felton made no resistance.  Lord de Winter placed him in the hands ofthe guards, who led him, while awaiting further orders, to a littleterrace commanding the sea; and then the baron hastened to the duke'schamber.

    At the cry uttered by the duke and the scream of Patrick, the man whomFelton had met in the antechamber rushed into the chamber.He found the duke reclining upon a sofa, with his hand pressed upon thewound.

    "Laporte," said the duke, in a dying voice, "Laporte, do you come fromher?"

    "Yes, monseigneur," replied the faithful cloak bearer of Anne ofAustria, "but too late, perhaps."

    "Silence, Laporte, you may be overheard.  Patrick, let no one enter.Oh, I cannot tell what she says to me!  My God, I am dying!"And the duke swooned.

    Meanwhile, Lord de Winter, the deputies, the leaders of the expedition,the officers of Buckingham's household, had all made their way into thechamber.  Cries of despair resounded on all sides.  The news, whichfilled the palace with tears and groans, soon became known, and spreaditself throughout the city.

    The report of a cannon announced that something new and unexpected hadtaken place.

    Lord de Winter tore his hair.

    "Too late by a minute!" cried he, "too late by a minute!  Oh, my God, myGod!  what a misfortune!"

    He had been informed at seven o'clock in the morning that a rope ladderfloated from one of the windows of the castle; he had hastened toMilady's chamber, had found it empty, the window open, and the barsfiled, had remembered the verbal caution D'Artagnan had transmitted tohim by his messenger, had trembled for the duke, and running to thestable without taking time to have a horse saddled, had jumped upon thefirst he found, had galloped off like the wind, had alighted below inthe courtyard, had ascended the stairs precipitately, and on the topstep, as we have said, had encountered Felton.

    The duke, however, was not dead.  He recovered a little, reopened hiseyes, and hope revived in all hearts.

    "Gentlemen," said he, "leave me along with Patrick and Laporte--ah, isthat you, De Winter?  You sent me a strange madman this morning!  Seethe state in which he has put me."

    "Oh, my Lord!" cried the baron, "I shall never console myself.""And you would be quite wrong, my dear De Winter," said Buckingham,holding out his hand to him.  "I do not know the man who deserves beingregretted during the whole life of another man; but leave us, I prayyou."

    The baron went out sobbing.

    There only remained in the closet of the wounded duke Laporte andPatrick.  A physician was sought for, but none was yet found."You will live, my Lord, you will live!" repeated the faithful servantof Anne of Austria, on his knees before the duke's sofa."What has she written to me?" said Buckingham, feebly, streaming withblood, and suppressing his agony to speak of her he loved, "what has shewritten to me?  Read me her letter."

    "Oh, my Lord!" said Laporte.

    "Obey, Laporte, do you not see I have no time to lose?"Laporte broke the seal, and placed the paper before the eyes of theduke; but Buckingham in vain tried to make out the writing."Read!" said he, "read!  I cannot see.  Read, then!  For soon, perhaps,I shall not hear, and I shall die without knowing what she has writtento me."

    Laporte made no further objection, and read:

    "My Lord, By that which, since I have known you, have suffered by youand for you, I conjure you, if you have any care for my repose, tocountermand those great armaments which you are preparing againstFrance, to put an end to a war of which it is publicly said religion isthe ostensible cause, and of which, it is generally whispered, your lovefor me is the concealed cause.  This war may not only bring greatcatastrophes upon England and France, but misfortune upon you, my Lord,for which I should never console myself.

    "Be careful of your life, which is menaced, and which will be dear to mefrom the moment I am not obliged to see an enemy in you."Your affectionate

    "ANNE"

    Buckingham collected all his remaining strength to listen to the readingof the letter; then, when it was ended, as if he had met with a bitterdisappointment, he asked, "Have you nothing else to say to me by theliving voice, Laporte?"

    "The queen charged me to tell you to watch over yourself, for she hadadvice that your assassination would be attempted.""And is that all--is that all?" replied Buckingham, impatiently."She likewise charged me to tell you that she still loved you.""Ah," said Buckingham, "God be praised!  My death, then, will not be toher as the death of a stranger!"

    Laporte burst into tears.

    "Patrick," said the due, "bring me the casket in which the diamond studswere kept."

    Patrick brought the object desired, which Laporte recognized as havingbelonged to the queen.

    "Now the scent bag of white satin, on which her cipher is embroidered inpearls."

    Patrick again obeyed.

    "Here, Laporte," said Buckingham, "these are the only tokens I everreceived from her--this silver casket and these two letters.  You willrestore them to her Majesty; and as a last memorial"--he looked roundfor some valuable object--"you will add--"

    He still sought; but his eyes, darkened by death, encountered only theknife which had fallen from the hand of Felton, still smoking with theblood spread over its blade.

    "And you will add to them this knife," said the duke, pressing the handof Laporte.  He had just strength enough to place the scent bag at thebottom of the silver casket, and to let the knife fall into it, making asign to Laporte that he was no longer able to speak; than, in a lastconvulsion, which this time he had not the power to combat, he slippedfrom the sofa to the floor.

    Patrick uttered a loud cry.

    Buckingham tried to smile a last time; but death checked his thought,which remained engraved on his brow like a last kiss of love.At this moment the duke's surgeon arrived, quite terrified; he wasalready on board the admiral's ship, where they had been obliged to seekhim.

    He approached the duke, took his hand, held it for an instant in hisown, and letting it fall, "All is useless," said he, "he is dead.""Dead, dead!" cried Patrick.

    At this cry all the crowd re-entered the apartment, and throughout thepalace and town there was nothing but consternation and tumult.As soon as Lord de Winter saw Buckingham was dead, he ran to Felton,whom the soldiers still guarded on the terrace of the palace."Wretch!" said he to the young man, who since the death of Buckinghamhad regained that coolness and self-possession which never afterabandoned him, "wretch!  what have you done?"

    "I have avenged myself!" said he.

    "Avenged yourself," said the baron.  "Rather say that you have served asan instrument to that accursed woman; but I swear to you that this crimeshall be her last."

    "I don't know what you mean," replied Felton, quietly, "and I amignorant of whom you are speaking, my Lord.  I killed the Duke ofBuckingham because he twice refused you yourself to appoint me captain;I have punished him for his injustice, that is all."De Winter, stupefied, looked on while the soldiers bound Felton, andcould not tell what to think of such  insensibility.One thing alone, however, threw a shade over the pallid brow of Felton.At every noise he heard, the simple Puritan fancied he recognized thestep and voice of Milady coming to throw herself into his arms, toaccuse herself, and die with him.

    All at once he started.  His eyes became fixed upon a point of the sea,commanded by the terrace where he was.  With the eagle glance of asailor he had recognized there, where another would have seen only agull hovering over the waves, the sail of a sloop which was directedtoward the cost of France.

    He grew deadly pale, placed his hand upon his heart, which was breaking,and at once perceived all the treachery.

    "One last favor, my Lord!" said he to the baron.

    "What?" asked his Lordship.

    "What o'clock is it?"

    The baron drew out his watch.  "It wants ten minutes to nine," said he.Milady had hastened her departure by an hour and a half.  As soon as sheheard the cannon which announced the fatal event, she had ordered theanchor to be weighed.  The vessel was making way under a blue sky, atgreat distance from the coast.

    "God has so willed it!" said he, with the resignation of a fanatic; butwithout, however, being able to take his eyes from that ship, on boardof which he doubtless fancied he could distinguish the white outline ofher to whom he had sacrificed his life.

    De Winter followed his look, observed his feelings, and guessed all."Be punished ALONE, for the first, miserable man!" said Lord de Winterto Felton, who was being dragged away with his eyes turned toward thesea; "but I swear to you by the memory of my brother whom I have lovedso much that your accomplice is not saved."

    Felton lowered his head without pronouncing a syllable.As to Lord de Winter, he descended the stairs rapidly, and went straightto the port.

    60  IN FRANCE

    The first fear of the King of England, Charles I, on learning of thedeath of the duke, was that such terrible news might discourage theRochellais; he tried, says Richelieu in his Memoirs, to conceal it fromthem as long as possible, closing all the ports of his kingdom, andcarefully keeping watch that no vessel should sail until the army whichBuckingham was getting together had gone, taking upon himself, indefault of Buckingham, to superintend the departure.He carried the strictness of this order so far as to detain in Englandthe ambassadors of Denmark, who had taken their leave, and the regularambassador of Holland, who was to take back to the port of Flushing theIndian merchantmen of which Charles I had made restitution to the UnitedProvinces.

    But as he did not think of giving this order till five hours after theevent--that is to say, till two o'clock in the afternoon--two vesselshad already left the port, the one bearing, as we know, Milady, who,already anticipating the event, was further confirmed in that belief byseeing the black flag flying at the masthead of the admiral's ship.As to the second vessel, we will tell hereafter whom it carried, and howit set sail.

    During this time nothing new occurred in the camp at La Rochelle; onlythe king, who was bored, as always, but perhaps a little more so in campthan elsewhere, resolved to go incognito and spend the festival of St.Louis at St. Germain, and asked the cardinal to order him an escort ofonly twenty Musketeers.  The cardinal, who sometimes became weary of theking, granted this leave of absence with great pleasure to his royallieutenant, who promised to return about the fifteenth of September.M. de Treville, being informed of this by his Eminence, packed hisportmanteau; and as without knowing the cause he knew the great desireand even imperative need which his friends had of returning to Paris, itgoes without saying that he fixed upon them to form part of the escort.The four young men heard the news a quarter of an hour after M. deTreville, for they were the first to whom he communicated it.  It wasthen that D'Artagnan appreciated the favor the cardinal had conferredupon him in making him at last enter the Musketeers--for without thatcircumstance he would have been forced to remain in the camp while hiscompanions left it.

    It goes without saying that this impatience to return toward Paris hadfor a cause the danger which Mme. Bonacieux would run of meeting at theconvent of Bethune with Milady, her mortal enemy.  Aramis therefore hadwritten immediately to Marie Michon, the seamstress at Tours who hadsuch fine acquaintances, to obtain from the queen authority for Mme.Bonacieux to leave the convent, and to retire either into Lorraine orBelgium.  They had not long to wait for an answer.  Eight or ten daysafterward Aramis received the following letter:

    My Dear Cousin, Here is the authorization from my sister to withdrawour little servant from the convent of Bethune, the air of which youthink is bad for her.  My sister sends you this authorization with greatpleasure, for she is very partial to the little girl, to whom sheintends to be more serviceable hereafter.

    I salute you,

    MARIE MICHON

    To this letter was added an order, conceived in these terms:

    At the Louvre, August 10, 1628

    The superior of the convent of Bethune will place in the hands of theperson who shall present this note to her the novice who entered theconvent upon my recommendation and under my patronage.ANNE

    It may be easily imagined how the relationship between Aramis and aseamstress who called the queen her sister amuse the young men; butAramis, after having blushed two or three times up to the whites of hiseyes at the gross pleasantry of Porthos, begged his friends not torevert to the subject again, declaring that if a single word more wassaid to him about it, he would never again implore his cousins tointerfere in such affairs.

    There was no further question, therefore, about Marie Michon among thefour Musketeers, who besides had what they wanted:  that was, the orderto withdraw Mme. Bonacieux from the convent of the Carmelites ofBethune.  It was true that this order would not be of great use to themwhile they were in camp at La Rochelle; that is to say, at the other enof France.  Therefore D'Artagnan was going to ask leave of absence of M.de Treville, confiding to him candidly the importance of his departure,when the news was transmitted to him as well as to his three friendsthat the king was about to set out for Paris with an escort of twentyMusketeers, and that they formed part of the escort.Their joy was great.  The lackeys were sent on before with the baggage,and they set out on the morning of the sixteenth.The cardinal accompanied his Majesty from Surgeres to Mauzes; and therethe king and his minister took leave of each other with greatdemonstrations of friendship.

    The king, however, who sought distraction, while traveling as fast aspossible--for he was anxious to be in Paris by the twenty-third--stoppedfrom time to time to fly the magpie, a pastime for which the taste hadbeen formerly inspired in him by De Luynes, and for which he had alwayspreserved a great predilection.  Out of the twenty Musketeers sixteen,when this took place, rejoiced greatly at this relaxation; but the otherfour cursed it heartily.  D'Artagnan, in particular, had a perpetualbuzzing in his ears, which Porthos explained thus:  "A very great ladyhas told me that this means that somebody is talking of you somewhere."At length the escort passed through Paris on the twenty-third, in thenight.  The king thanked M. de Treville, and permitted him to distributefurloughs for four days, on condition that the favored parties shouldnot appear in any public place, under penalty of the Bastille.The first four furloughs granted, as may be imagined, were to our fourfriends.  Still further, Athos obtained of M. de Treville six daysinstead of four, and introduced into these six days two more nights--forthey set out on the twenty-fourth at five o'clock in the evening, and asa further kindness M. de Treville post-dated the leave to the morning ofthe twenty-fifth.

    "Good Lord!" said D'Artagnan, who, as we have often said, never stumbledat anything.  "It appears to me that we are making a great trouble of avery simple thing.  In two days, and by using up two or three horses(that's nothing; I have plenty of money), I am at Bethune.  I present myletter from the queen to the superior, and I bring back the deartreasure If go to seek-not into Lorraine, not into Belgium, but toParis, where she will be much better concealed, particularly while thecardinal is at L Rochelle.  Well, once returned from the country, halfby the protection of her cousin, half through what we have personallydone for her, we shall obtain from the queen what we desire.  Remain,then, where you are, and do not exhaust yourselves with useless fatigue.Myself and Planchet are all that such a simple expedition requires."To this Athos replied quietly:  "We also have money left--for I have notyet drunk all my share of the diamond, and Porthos and Aramis have noteaten all theirs.  We can therefore use up four horses as well as one.But consider, D'Artagnan," added he, in a tone so solemn that it madethe young man shudder, "consider that Bethune is a city where thecardinal has given rendezvous to a woman who, wherever she goes, bringsmisery with her.  If you had only to deal with four men, D'Artagnan, Iwould allow you to go alone.  You have to do with that woman!  We fourwill go; and I hope to God that with our four lackeys we may be insufficient number."

    "You terrify me, Athos!"  cried D'Artagnan.  "My God!  what do youfear?"

    "Everything!" replied Athos.

    D'Artagnan examined the countenances of his companions, which, like thatof Athos, wore an impression of deep anxiety; and they continued theirroute as fast as their horses could carry them, but without addinganother word.

    On the evening of the twenty-fifth, as they were entering Arras, and asD'Artagnan was dismounting at the inn of the Golden Harrow to drink aglass of wine, a horseman came out of the post yard, where he had justhad a relay, started off at a gallop, and with a fresh horse took theroad to Paris.  At the moment he passed through the gateway into thestreet, the wind blew open the cloak in which he was wrapped, althoughit was in the month of August, and lifted his hat, which the travelerseized with his hand the moment it had left his head, pulling it eagerlyover his eyes.

    D'Artagnan, who had his eyes fixed upon this man, became very pale, andlet his glass fall.

    "What is the matter, monsieur?"  said Planchet.  "Oh, come, gentlemen,my master is ill!"

    The three friends hastened toward D'Artagnan, who, instead of being ill,ran toward his horse.  They stopped him at the door."Well, where the devil are you going now?"  cried Athos."It is he!"  cried D'Artagnan, pale with anger, an with the sweat on hisbrow, "it is he!  let me overtake him!"

    "He?  What he?"  asked Athos.

    "He, that man!"

    "What man?"

    "That cursed man, my evil genius, whom I have always met with whenthreatened by some misfortune, he who accompanied that horrible womanwhen I met her for the first time, he whom I was seeking when I offendedour Athos, he whom I saw on the very morning Madame Bonacieux wasabducted.  I have seen him; that is he!  I recognized him when the windblew upon his cloak."

    "The devil!"  said Athos, musingly.

    "To saddle, gentlemen!  to saddle!  Let us pursue him, and we shallovertake him!"

    "My dear friend," said Aramis, "remember that he goes in an oppositedirection from that I which we are going, that he has a fresh horse, andours are fatigued, so that we shall disable our own horses without evena chance of overtaking him.  Let the man go, D'Artagnan; let us save thewoman."

    "Monsieur, monsieur!"  cried a hostler, running out and looking afterthe stranger, "monsieur, here is a paper which dropped out of your hat!Eh, monsieur, eh!"

    "Friend," said D'Artagnan, "a half-pistole for that paper!""My faith, monsieur, with great pleasure!  Here it is!"The hostler, enchanted with the good day's work he had done, returned tothe yard.  D'Artagnan unfolded the paper.

    "Well?"  eagerly demanded all his three friends.

    "Nothing but one word!"  said D'Artagnan.

    "Yes," said Aramis, "but that one word is the name of some town orvillage."

    "Armentieres,"  read Porthos;  "Armentieres?  I don't know such aplace."

    "And that name of a town or village is written in her hand!" criedAthos.

    "Come on, come on!"  said D'Artagnan; "let us keep that paper carefully,perhaps I have not thrown away my half-pistole.  To horse, my friends,to horse!"

    And the four friends flew at a gallop along the road to Bethune.

    61  THE CARMELITE CONCERT AT BETHUNE

    Great criminals bear bout them a kind of predestination which makes themsurmount all obstacles, which makes them escape all dangers, up to themoment which a wearied Providence has marked as the rock of theirimpious fortunes.

    It was thus with Milady.  She escaped the cruisers of both nations, andarrived at Boulogne without accident.

    When landing at Portsmouth, Milady was an Englishwoman whom thepersecutions of the French drove from La Rochelle; when landing atBoulogne, after a two days' passage, she passed for a Frenchwoman whomthe English persecuted at Portsmouth out of their hatred for France.Milady had, likewise, the best of passports-her beauty, her nobleappearance, and the liberality with which she distribute her pistoles.Freed from the usual formalities by the affable smile and gallantmanners of an old governor of the port, who kissed her hand, she onlyremained long enough at Boulogne to put into the post a letter,conceived in the following terms:

    "To his Eminence Monseigneur the Cardinal Richelieu, in his camp beforeLa Rochelle.

    Monseigneur, Let your Eminence be reassured.  His Grace the Duke ofBuckingham WILL NOT SET OUT for France.

    MILADY DE-

    "BOULOGNE, evening of the twenty-fifth.

    "P.S.-According to the desire of your Eminence, I report to the conventof the Carmelites at Bethune, where I will await your orders."

    Accordingly, that same evening Milady commenced her journey.  Nightovertook her; she stopped, and slept at an inn.  At five o'clock thenext morning she again proceeded, and in three hours after enteredBethune.  She inquired for the convent of the Carmelites, and wentthither immediately.

    The superior met her; Milady showed her the cardinal's order.  Theabbess assigned her a chamber, and had breakfast served.All the past was effaced from the eyes of this woman; and her looks,fixed on the future, beheld nothing but the high fortunes reserved forher by the cardinal, whom she had so successfully served without hisname being in any way mixed up with the sanguinary affair.  The ever-newpassions which consumed her gave to her life the appearance of thoseclouds which float in the heavens, reflecting sometimes azure, sometimesfire, sometimes the opaque blackness of the tempest, and which leave notraces upon the earth behind them but devastation and death.After breakfast, the abbess came to pay her a visit.  There is verylittle amusement in the cloister, and the good superior was eager tomake the acquaintance of her new boarder.

    Milady wished to please the abbess.  This was a very easy matter for awoman so really superior as she was.  She tried to be agreeable, and shewas charming, winning the good superior by her varied conversation andby the graces of her whole personality.

    The abbess, who was the daughter of a noble house, took particulardelight in stories of the court, which so seldom travel to theextremities of the kingdom, and which, above all, have so muchdifficulty in penetrating the walls of convents, at whose threshold thenoise of the world dies away.

    Milady, on the contrary, was quite conversant with all aristocraticintrigues, amid which she had constantly lived for five or six years.She made it her business, therefore, to amuse the good abbess with theworldly practices of the court of France, mixed with the eccentricpursuits of the king; she made for her the scandalous chronicle of thelords and ladies of the court, whom the abbess knew perfectly by name,touched lightly on the amours of the queen and the Duke of Buckingham,talking a great deal to induce her auditor to talk a little.But the abbess contented herself with listening and smiling withoutreplying a word.  Milady, however, saw that this sort of narrativeamused her very much, and kept at it; only she now let her conversationdrift toward the cardinal.

    But she was greatly embarrassed.  She did not know whether the abbesswas a royalist or a cardinalist; she therefore confined herself to aprudent middle course.  But the abbess, on her part, maintained areserve still more prudent, contenting herself with making a profoundinclination of the head every time the fair traveler pronounced the nameof his Eminence.

    Milady began to think she should soon grow weary of a convent life; sheresolved, then, to risk something in order that she might know how toact afterward.  Desirous of seeing how far the discretion of the goodabbess would go, she began to tell a story, obscure at first, but verycircumstantial afterward, about the cardinal, relating the amours of theminister with Mme. d'Aiguillon, Marion de Lorme, and several other gaywomen.

    The abbess listened more  attentively, grew animated by degrees, andsmiled.

    "Good," thought Milady; "she takes a pleasure in my conversation.  Ifshe is a cardinalist, she has no fanaticism, at least.She then went on to describe the persecutions exercised by the cardinalupon his enemies.  The abbess only crossed herself, without approving ordisapproving.

    This confirmed Milady in her opinion that the abbess was rather royalistthan cardinalist.  Milady therefore continued, coloring her narrationsmore and more.

    "I am very ignorant of these matters," said the abbess, at length; "buthowever distant from the court we may be, however remote from theinterests of the world we may be placed, we have very sad examples ofwhat you have related.  And one of our boarders has suffered much fromthe vengeance and persecution of the cardinal!"

    "One of your boarders?" said Milady; "oh, my God!  Poor woman!  I pityher, then."

    "And you have reason, for she is much to be pitied.  Imprisonment,menaces, ill treatment-she has suffered everything.  But after all,"resumed the abbess, "Monsieur Cardinal has perhaps plausible motives foracting thus; and though she has the look of an angel, we must not alwaysjudge people by the appearance."

    "Good!" said Milady to herself; "who knows!  I am about, perhaps, todiscover something here; I am in the vein."

    She tried to give her countenance an appearance of perfect candor."Alas," said Milady, "I know it is so.  It is said that we must nottrust to the face; but in what, then, shall we place confidence, if notin the most beautiful work of the Lord?  As for me, I shall be deceivedall my life perhaps, but I shall always have faith in a person whosecountenance inspires me with sympathy."

    "You would, then, be tempted to believe," said the abbess, "that thisyoung person is innocent?"

    "The cardinal pursues not only crimes," said she:  "there are certainvirtues which he pursues more severely than certain offenses.""Permit me, madame, to express my surprise," said the abbess."At what?" said Milady, with the utmost ingenuousness."At the language you use."

    "What do you find so astonishing in that language?" said Milady,smiling.

    "You are the friend of the cardinal, for he sends you hither, and yet--""And yet I speak ill of him," replied Milady, finishing the thought ofthe superior.

    "At least you don't speak well of him."

    "That is because I am not his friend," said she, sighing, "but hisvictim!"

    "But this letter in which he recommends you to me?""Is an order for me to confine myself to a sort of prison, from which hewill release me by one of his satellites."

    "But why have you not fled?"

    "Whither should I go?  Do you believe there is a spot on the earth whichthe cardinal cannot reach if he takes the trouble to stretch forth hishand?  If I were a man, that would barely be possible; but what can awoman do?  This  young boarder of yours, has she tried to fly?""No, that is true; but she--that is another thing; I believe she isdetained in France by some love affair."

    "Ah," said Milady, with a sigh, "if she loves she is not altogetherwretched."

    "Then," said the abbess, looking at Milady with increasing interest, "Ibehold another poor victim?"

    "Alas, yes," said Milady.

    The abbess looked at her for an instant with uneasiness, as if a freshthought suggested itself to her mind.

    "You are not an enemy of our holy faith?" said she, hesitatingly."Who--I?"  cried Milady; "I a Protestant?  Oh, no!  I call to witnessthe God who hears us, that on the contrary I am a fervent Catholic!""Then, madame," said the abbess, smiling, "be reassured; the house inwhich you are shall not be a very hard prison, and we will do all in ourpower to make you cherish your captivity.  You will find here, moreover,the young woman of whom I spoke, who is persecuted, no doubt, inconsequence of some court intrigue.  She is amiable and well-behaved.""What is her name?"

    "She was sent to me by someone of high rank, under the name of Kitty.  Ihave not tried to discover her other name."

    "Kitty!"  cried Milady.  "What?  Are you sure?"

    "That she is called so?  Yes, madame.  Do you know her?"Milady smiled to herself at the idea which had occurred to her that thismight be her old chambermaid.  There was connected with the remembranceof this girl a remembrance of anger; and a desire of vengeancedisordered the features of Milady, which, however, immediately recoveredthe calm and benevolent expression which this woman of a hundred faceshad for a moment allowed them to lose.

    "And when can I see this young lady, for whom I already feel so great asympathy?"  asked Milady.

    "Why, this evening," said the abbess; "today even.  But you have beentraveling these four days, as you told me yourself.  This morning yourose at five o'clock; you must stand in need of repose.  Go to bed andsleep; at dinnertime we will rouse you."

    Although Milady would very willingly have gone without sleep, sustainedas she was by all the excitements which a new adventure awakened in herheart, ever thirsting for intrigues, she nevertheless accepted the offerof the superior.  During the last fifteen days she had experience somany an such various emotions that if her frame of iron was stillcapable of supporting fatigue, her mind required repose.She therefore took leave of the abbess, and went to bed, softly rockedby the ideas of vengeance which the name of Kitty had naturally broughtto her thoughts.  She remembered that almost unlimited promise which thecardinal had given her if she succeeded in her enterprise.  She hadsucceeded; D'Artagnan was then in her power!

    One thing alone frightened her; that was the remembrance of her husband,the Comte de la Fere, whom she had believed dead, or at leastexpatriated, and whom she found again in Athos-the best friend ofD'Artagnan.

    But alas, if he was the friend of D'Artagnan, he must have lent him hisassistance in all the proceedings by whose aid the queen had defeatedthe project of his Eminence; if he was the friend of  D'Artagnan, he wasthe enemy of the cardinal; and she doubtless would succeed in involvinghim in the vengeance by which she hoped to destroy the young Musketeer.All these hopes were so many sweet thoughts for Milady; so, rocked bythem, she soon fell asleep.

    She was awakened by a soft voice which sounded at the foot of her bed.She opened her eyes, and saw the abbess, accompanied by a young womanwith light hair and delicate complexion, who fixed upon her a look fullof benevolent curiosity.

    The face of the young woman was entirely unknown to her.  Each examinedthe other with great attention, while exchanging the customarycompliments; both were very handsome, but of quite different styles ofbeauty.  Milady, however, smiled in observing that she excelled theyoung woman by far in her high air and aristocratic bearing.  It is truethat the habit of a novice, which the young woman wore, was not veryadvantageous in a contest of this kind.

    The abbess introduced them to each other.  When this formality wasended, as her duties called her to chapel, she left the two young womenalone.

    The novice, seeing Milady in bed, was about the follow the example ofthe superior; but Milady stopped her.

    "How, madame," said she, "I have scarcely seen  you, and you alreadywish to deprive me of your company, upon which I had counted a little, Imust confess, for the time I have to pass here?"

    "No, madame," replied the novice, "only I thought I had chosen my timeill; you were asleep, you are fatigued."

    "Well," said Milady, "what can those who sleep wish for--a happyawakening?  This awakening you have given me; allow me, then, to enjoyit at my ease," and taking her hand, she drew her toward the armchair bythe bedside.

    The novice sat down.

    "How unfortunate I am!" said she; "I have been here six months withoutthe shadow of recreation.  You arrive, and your presence was likely toafford me delightful company; yet I expect, in all probability, to quitthe convent at any moment."

    "How, you are going soon?"  asked Milady.

    "At least I hope so," said the novice, with an expression of joy whichshe made no effort to disguise.

    "I think I learned you had suffered persecutions from the cardinal,"continued Milady; "that would have been another motive for sympathybetween us."

    "What I have heard, then, from our good mother is true; you havelikewise been a victim of that wicked priest."

    "Hush!"  said Milady; "let us not, even here, speak thus of him.  All mymisfortunes arise from my having said nearly what you have said before awoman whom I thought my friend, and who betrayed me.  Are you also thevictim of a treachery?"

    "No," said the novice, "but of my devotion--of a devotion to a woman Iloved, for whom I would have laid down my life, for whom I would give itstill."

    "And who has abandoned you--is that it?"

    "I have been sufficiently unjust to believe so; but during the last twoor three days I have obtained proof to the contrary, for which I thankGod--for it would have cost me very dear to think she had forgotten me.But you, madame, you appear to be free," continued the novice; "and ifyou were inclined to fly it only rests with yourself to do so.""Whither would you have me go, without friends, without money, in a partof France with which I am unacquainted, and where I have never beenbefore?"

    "Oh," cried the novice," as to friends, you would have them wherever youwant, you appear so good and are so beautiful!"

    "That does not prevent," replied Milady, softening her smile so as togive it an angelic expression, "my being alone or being persecuted.""Hear me," said the novice; "we must trust in heaven.  There alwayscomes a moment when the good you have done pleads your cause before God;and see, perhaps it is a happiness for you, humble and powerless as Iam, that you have met with me, for if I leave this place, well-I havepowerful friends, who, after having exerted themselves on my account,may also exert themselves for you."

    "Oh, when I said I was alone," said Milady, hoping to make the novicetalk by talking of herself, "it is not for want of friends in highplaces; but these friends themselves tremble before the cardinal.  Thequeen herself does not dare to oppose the terrible minister.  I haveproof that her Majesty, notwithstanding her excellent heart, has morethan once been obliged to abandon to the anger of his Eminence personswho had served her."

    "Trust me, madame; the queen may appear to have abandoned those persons,but we must not put faith in appearances.  The more they are persecuted,the more she thinks of them; and often, when they least expect it, theyhave proof of a kind remembrance."

    "Alas!"  said Milady, "I believe so; the queen is so good!""Oh, you know her, then, that lovely and noble queen, that you speak ofher thus!" cried the novice, with enthusiasm.

    "That is to say," replied Milady, driven into her entrenchment, "that Ihave not the honor of knowing her personally; but I know a great numberof her most intimate friends.  I am acquainted with Monsieur de Putange;I met Monsieur Dujart in England; I know Monsieur de Treville.""Monsieur de Treville!"  exclaimed the novice, "do you know Monsieur deTreville?"

    "Yes, perfectly well--intimately even."

    "The captain of the king's Musketeers?"

    "The captain of the king's Musketeers."

    "Why, then, only see!"  cried the novice; "we shall soon be wellacquainted, almost friends.  If you know Monsieur de Treville, you musthave visited him?"

    "Often!"  said Milady, who, having entered this track, and perceivingthat falsehood succeeded, was determined to follow it to the end."With him, then, you must have seen some of his Musketeers?""All those he is in the habit of receiving!"  replied Milady, for whomthis conversation began to have a real interest.

    "Name a few of those whom you know, and you will see if they are myfriends."

    "Well!"  said Milady, embarrassed, " I know Monsieur de Louvigny,Monsieur de Courtivron, Monsieur de Ferussac."

    The novice let her speak, then seeing that she paused, she said, "Don'tyou know a gentleman named Athos?"

    Milady became as pale as the sheets in which she was lying, and mistressas she was of herself, could not help uttering a cry, seizing the handof the novice, and devouring her with looks.

    "What is the matter?  Good God!"  asked the poor woman, "have I saidanything that has wounded you?"

    "No; but the name struck me, because I also have known that gentleman,and it appeared strange to me to meet with a person who appears to knowhim well."

    "Oh, yes, very well; not only him, but some of his friends, MessieursPorthos and Aramis!"

    "Indeed!  you know them likewise?  I know them," cried Milady, who beganto feel a chill penetrate her heart.

    "Well, if you know them, you know that they are good and freecompanions.  Why do you not apply to them, if you stand in need ofhelp?"

    "That is to say," stammered Milady, "I am not really very intimate withany of them.  I know them from having heard one of their friends,Monsieur d'Artagnan, say a great deal about them.""You know Monsieur d'Artagnan!" cried the novice, in her turn seizingthe hands of Milady and devouring her with her eyes.Then remarking the strange expression of Milady's countenance, she said,"Pardon me, madame; you know him by what title?"

    "Why," replied Milady, embarrassed, "why, by the title of friend.""You deceive me, madame," said the novice; "you have been his mistress!""It is you who have been his mistress, madame!"  cried Milady, in herturn.

    "I?"  said the novice.

    "Yes, you!  I know you now.  You are Madame Bonacieux!"The young woman drew back, filled with surprise and terror."Oh, do not deny it!  Answer!" continued Milady.

    "Well, yes, madame," said the novice, "Are we rivals?"The countenance of Milady was illumined by so savage a joy that underany other circumstances Mme. Bonacieux would have fled in terror; butshe was absorbed by jealousy.

    "Speak, madame!"  resumed Mme. Bonacieux, with an energy of which shemight not have been believed capable.  "Have you been, or are you, hismistress?"

    "Oh, no!"  cried Milady, with an accent that admitted no doubt of hertruth.  "Never, never!"

    "I believe you," said Mme. Bonacieux; "but why, then, did you cry outso?"

    "Do you not understand?" said Milady, who had already overcome heragitation and recovered all her presence of mind."How can I understand?  I know nothing."

    "Can you not understand that Monsieur d'Artagnan, being my friend, mighttake me into his confidence?"

    "Truly?"

    "Do you not perceive that I know all--your abduction from the littlehouse at St. Germain, his despair, that of his friends, and theiruseless inquiries up to this moment?  How could I help being astonishedwhen, without having the least expectation of such a thing, I meet youface to face--you, of whom we have so often spoken together, you whom heloves with all his soul, you whom he had taught me to love before I hadseen you!  Ah, dear Constance, I have found you, then; I see you atlast!"

    And Milady stretched out her arms to Mme. Bonacieux, who, convinced bywhat she had just said, saw nothing in this woman whom an instant beforeshe had believed her rival but a sincere and devoted friend."Oh, pardon me, pardon me!"  cried she, sinking upon the shoulders ofMilady.  "Pardon me, I love him so much!"

    These two women held each other for an instant in a close embrace.Certainly, if Milady's strength had been equal to her hatred, Mme.Bonacieux would never have left that embrace alive.  But not being ableto stifle her, she smiled upon her.

    "Oh, you beautiful, good little creature!"  said Milady.  "How delightedI am to have found you!  Let me look at you!"  and while saying thesewords, she absolutely devoured her by her looks.  "Oh, yes it is youindeed!  From what he has told me, I know  you now.  I recognize youperfectly."

    The poor young woman could not possibly suspect what frightful crueltywas behind the rampart of that pure brow, behind those brilliant eyes inwhich she read nothing but interest and compassion."Then  you know what I have suffered," said Mme. Bonacieux, "since hehas told you what he has suffered; but to suffer for him is happiness.Milady replied mechanically, "Yes, that is happiness."  She was thinkingof something else.

    "And then," continued Mme. Bonacieux, "my punishment is drawing to aclose.  Tomorrow, this evening, perhaps, I shall see him again; and thenthe past will no longer exist."

    "This evening?"  asked Milady, roused from her reverie by these words."What do you mean?  Do you expect news from him?""I expect himself."

    "Himself?  D'Artagnan here?"

    "Himself!"

    "But that's impossible!  He is at the siege of La Rochelle with thecardinal.  He will not return till after the taking of the city.""Ah, you fancy so!  But is there anything impossible for my D'Artagnan,the noble and loyal gentleman?"

    "Oh, I cannot believe you!"

    "Well, read, then!" said the unhappy young woman, in the excess of herpride and joy, presenting a letter to Milady.

    "The writing of Madame de Chevreuse!"  said Milady to herself.  "Ah, Ialways thought there was some secret understanding in that quarter!"And she greedily read the following few lines:

    My Dear Child, Hold yourself ready.  OUR FRIEND will see you soon,and he will only see  you to release you from that imprisonment in whichyour safety required you should be concealed.  Prepare, then, for yourdeparture, and never despair of us.

    Our charming Gascon has just proved himself as brave and faithful asever.  Tell him that certain parties are grateful for the warning he hasgiven.

    "Yes, yes," said Milady; "the letter is precise.  Do you know what thatwarning was?"

    "No, I only suspect he has warned the queen against some freshmachinations of the cardinal."

    "Yes, that's it, no doubt!" said Milady, returning the letter to Mme.Bonacieux, and letting her head sink pensively upon her bosom.At that moment they heard the gallop of a horse.

    "Oh!"  cried Mme. Bonacieux, darting to the window, "can it be he?"Milady remained still in bed, petrified by surprise; so many unexpectedthings happened to her all at once that for the first time she was at aloss.

    "He, he!"  murmured she; "can it be he?"  And she remained in bed withher eyes fixed.

    "Alas, no!"  said Mme. Bonacieux; "it is a man I don't know, although heseems to be coming here.  Yes, he checks his pace; he stops at the gate;he rings."

    Milady sprang out of bed.

    "You are sure it is not he?"  said she.

    "Yes, yes, very sure!"

    "Perhaps you did not see well."

    "Oh, if I were to see the plume of his hat, the end of his cloak, Ishould know HIM!"

    Milady was dressing herself all the time.

    "Yes, he has entered."

    "It is for you or me!"

    "My God, how agitated you seem!"

    "Yes, I admit it.  I have not your confidence; I fear the cardinal.""Hush!"  said Mme. Bonacieux; "somebody is coming."Immediately the door opened, and the superior entered."Did you come from Boulogne?"  demanded she of Milady."Yes," replied she, trying to recover her self-possession. "Who wantsme?"

    "A man who will not tell his name, but who comes from the cardinal.""And who wishes to speak with me?"

    "Who wishes to speak to a lady recently come from Boulogne.""Then let him come in, if you please."

    "Oh, my God, my God!"  cried Mme. Bonacieux.  "Can it be bad news?""I fear it."

    "I will leave you with this stranger; but as soon as he is gone, if youwill permit me, I will return."

    "PERMIT you?  I BESEECH you."

    The superior and Mme. Bonacieux retired.

    Milady remained alone, with her eyes fixed upon the door.  An instantlater, the jingling of spurs was heard upon the stairs, steps drew near,the door opened, and a man appeared.

    Milady uttered a cry of joy; this man was the Comte de Rochefort--thedemoniacal tool of his Eminence.

    62  TWO VARIETIES OF DEMONS

    "Ah," cried Milady and Rochefort together, "it is you!""Yes, it is I."

    "And you come?" asked Milady.

    "From La Rochelle; and you?"

    "From England."

    "Buckingham?"

    "Dead or desperately wounded, as I left without having been able to hearanything of him.  A fanatic has just assassinated him.""Ah," said Rochefort, with a smile; "this is a fortunate chance--onethat will delight his Eminence!  Have you informed him of it?""I wrote to him from Boulogne.  But what brings you here?""His Eminence was uneasy, and sent me to find you.""I only arrived yesterday."

    "And what have you been doing since yesterday?"

    "I have not lost my time."

    "Oh, I don't doubt that."

    "Do you know whom I have encountered here?"

    "No."

    "Guess."

    "How can I?"

    "That young woman whom the queen took out of prison.""The mistress of that fellow D'Artagnan?"

    "Yes; Madame Bonacieux, with whose retreat the cardinal wasunacquainted."

    "Well, well," said Rochefort, "here is a chance which may pair off withthe other!  Monsieur Cardinal is indeed a privileged man!""Imagine my astonishment," continued Milady, "when I found myself faceto face with this woman!"

    "Does she know you?"

    "No."

    "Then she looks upon you as a stranger?"

    Milady smiled.  "I am her best friend."

    "Upon my honor," said Rochefort, "it takes you, my dear countess, toperform such miracles!"

    "And it is well I can, Chevalier," said Milady, "for do you know what isgoing on here?"

    "No."

    "They will come for her tomorrow or the day after, with an order fromthe queen."

    "Indeed!  And who?"

    "D'Artagnan and his friends."

    "Indeed, they will go so far that we shall be obliged to send them tothe Bastille."

    "Why is it not done already?"

    "What would you?  The cardinal has a weakness for these men which Icannot comprehend."

    "Indeed!"

    "Yes."

    "Well, then, tell him this, Rochefort.  Tell him that our conversationat the inn of the Red Dovecot was overheard by these four men; tell himthat after his departure one of them came up to me and took from me byviolence the safe-conduct which he had given me; tell him they warnedLord de Winter of my journey to England; that this time they nearlyfoiled my mission as they foiled the affair of the studs; tell him thatamong these four men two only are to be feared--D'Artagnan and Athos;tell him that the third, Aramis, is the lover of Madame de Chevreuse--hemay be left alone, we know his secret, and it may be useful; as to thefourth, Porthos, he is a fool, a simpleton, a blustering booby, notworth troubling himself about."

    "But these four men must be now at the siege of La Rochelle?""I thought so, too; but a letter which Madame Bonacieux has receivedfrom Madame the Constable, and which she has had the imprudence to showme, leads me to believe that these four men, on the contrary, are on theroad hither to take her away."

    "The devil!  What's to be done?"

    "What did the cardinal say about me?"

    "I was to take your dispatches, written or verbal, and return by post;and when he shall know what you have done, he will advise what you haveto do."

    "I must, then, remain here?"

    "Here, or in the neighborhood."

    "You cannot take me with you?"

    "No, the order is imperative.  Near the camp you might be recognized;and your presence, you must be aware, would compromise the cardinal.""Then I must wait here, or in the neighborhood?"

    "Only tell me beforehand where you will wait for intelligence from thecardinal; let me now always where to find you."

    "Observe, it is probable that I may not be able to remain here.""Why?"

    "You forget that my enemies may arrive at any minute.""That's true; but is this little woman, then, to escape his Eminence?""Bah!"  said Milady, with a smile that belonged only to herself; "youforget that I am her best friend."

    "Ah, that's true!  I may then tell the cardinal, with respect to thislittle woman--"

    "That he may be at ease."

    "Is that all?"

    "He will now what that means."

    "He will guess, at least.  Now, then, what had I better do?""Return instantly.  It appears to me that the news you bear is worth thetrouble of a little diligence."

    "My chaise broke down coming into Lilliers."

    "Capital!"

    "What, CAPITAL?"

    "Yes, I want your chaise."

    "And how shall I travel, then?"

    "On horseback."

    "You talk very comfortably,--a hundred and eighty leagues!""What's that?"

    "One can do it!  Afterward?"

    "Afterward?  Why, in passing through Lilliers you will send me yourchaise, with an order to your servant to place himself at my disposal.""Well."

    "You have, no doubt, some order from the cardinal about you?""I have my FULL POWER."

    "Show it to the abbess, and tell her that someone will come and fetchme, either today or tomorrow, and that I am to follow the person whopresents himself in your name."

    "Very well."

    "Don't forget to treat me harshly in speaking of me to the abbess.""To what purpose?"

    "I am a victim of the cardinal.  It is necessary to inspire confidencein that poor little Madame Bonacieux."

    "That's true.  Now, will you make me a report of all that has happened?""Why, I have related the events to you.  You have a good memory; repeatwhat I have told you.  A paper may be lost."

    "You are right; only let me know where to find you that I may not runneedlessly about the neighborhood."

    "That's correct; wait!"

    "Do you want a map?"

    "Oh, I know this country marvelously!"

    "You?  When were you here?"

    "I was brought up here."

    "Truly?"

    "It is worth something, you see, to have been brought up somewhere.""You will wait for me, then?"

    "Let me reflect a little!  Ay, that will do--at Armentieres.""Where is that Armentieres?"

    "A little town on the Lys; I shall only  have to cross the river, and Ishall be in a foreign country."

    "Capital!  but it is understood you will only cross the river in case ofdanger."

    "That is well understood."

    "And in that case, how shall I know where you are?""You do not want your lackey?"

    "Is he a sure man?"

    "To the proof."

    "Give him to me. Nobody knows him.  I will leave him at the place Iquit, and he will conduct you to me."

    "And you say you will wait for me at Armentieres?""At Armentieres."

    "Write that name on a bit of paper, lest I should forget it.  There isnothing compromising in the name of a town.  Is it not so?""Eh, who knows?  Never mind," said Milady, writing the name on half asheet of paper; "I will compromise myself."

    "Well," said Rochefort, taking the paper from Milady, folding it, andplacing it in the lining of his hat, "you may be easy.  I will do aschildren do, for fear of losing the paper--repeat the name along theroute.  Now, is that all?"

    "I believe so."

    "Let us see:  Buckingham dead or grievously wounded; your conversationwith the cardinal overheard by the four Musketeers; Lord de Winterwarned of your arrival at Portsmouth; D'Artagnan and Athos to theBastille; Aramis the lover of Madame de Chevreuse; Porthos an ass;Madame Bonacieux found again; to send you the chaise as soon aspossible; to place my lackey at your disposal; to make you out a victimof the cardinal  in order that the abbess may entertain no suspicion;Armentieres, on the banks of the Lys. Is that all, then?""In truth, my dear Chevalier, you are a miracle of memory.  A PROPOS,add one thing--"

    "What?"

    "I saw some very pretty woods which almost touch the convent garden.Say that I am permitted to walk in those woods.  Who knows?  Perhaps Ishall stand in need of a back door for retreat."

    "You think of everything."

    "And you forget one thing."

    "What?"

    "To ask me if I want money."

    "That's true.  How much do you want?"

    "All you have in gold."

    "I have five hundred pistoles, or thereabouts."

    "I have as much.  With a thousand pistoles one may face everything.Empty your pockets."

    "There."

    "Right.  And you go--"

    "In an hour--time to eat a morsel, during which I shall send for a posthorse."

    "Capital!  Adieu, Chevalier."

    "Adieu, Countess."

    "Commend me to the cardinal."

    "Commend me to Satan."

    Milady and Rochefort exchanged a smile and separated.  An hour afterwardRochefort set out at a grand gallop; five hours after that he passedthrough Arras.

    Our readers already know how he was recognized by D'Artagnan, and howthat recognition by inspiring fear in the four Musketeers had givenfresh activity to their journey.

    63  THE DROP OF WATER

    Rochefort had scarcely departed when Mme. Bonacieux re-entered.  Shefound Milady with a smiling countenance.

    "Well," said the young woman, "what you dreaded has happened.  Thisevening, or tomorrow, the cardinal will send someone to take you away.""Who told you that, my dear?"  asked Milady.

    "I heard it from the mouth of the messenger himself.""Come and sit down close to me," said Milady.

    "Here I am."

    "Wait till I assure myself that nobody hears us.""Why all these precautions?"

    "You shall know."

    Milady arose, went to the door, opened it, looked in the corridor, andthen returned and seated herself close to Mme. Bonacieux."Then," said she, "he has well played his part."

    "Who has?"

    "He who just now presented himself to the abbess as a messenger from thecardinal."

    "It was, then, a part he was playing?"

    "Yes, my child."

    "That man, then, was not--"

    "That man," said Milady, lowering her voice, "is my brother.""Your brother!"  cried Mme. Bonacieux.

    "No  one must know this secret, my dear, but yourself.  If you reveal itto anyone in the world, I shall be lost, and perhaps yourself likewise.""Oh, my God!"

    "Listen.  This is what has happened:  My brother, who was coming to myassistance to take me away by force if it were necessary, met with theemissary of the cardinal, who was coming in search of me.  He followedhim.  At a solitary and retired part of the road he drew his sword, andrequired the messenger to deliver up to him the papers of which he wasthe bearer.  The messenger resisted; my brother killed him.""Oh!" said Mme. Bonacieux, shuddering.

    "Remember, that was the only means.  Then my brother determined tosubstitute cunning for force.  He took the papers, and presented himselfhere as the emissary of the cardinal, and in an hour or two a carriagewill come to take me away by the orders of his Eminence.""I understand.  It is your brother who sends this carriage.""Exactly; but that is not all.  That letter  you have received, andwhich you believe to be from Madame de Chevreuse--""Well?"

    "It is a forgery."

    "How can that be?"

    "Yes, a forgery; it is a snare to prevent your making any resistancewhen they come to fetch you."

    "But it is D'Artagnan that will come."

    "Do not deceive yourself. D'Artagnan and his friends are detained at thesiege of La Rochelle."

    "How do you know that?"

    "My brother met some emissaries of the cardinal in the uniform ofMusketeers.  You would have been summoned to the gate; you would havebelieved yourself about to meet friends; you would have been abducted,and conducted back to Paris."

    "Oh, my God!  My senses fail me amid such a chaos of iniquities. I feel,if this continues," said Mme. Bonacieux, raising her hands to herforehead, "I shall go mad!"

    "Stop--"

    "What?"

    "I hear a horse's steps; it is my brother setting off again.  I shouldlike to offer him a last salute.  Come!"

    Milady opened the window, and made a sign to Mme. Bonacieux to join her.The young woman complied.

    Rochefort passed at a gallop.

    "Adieu, brother!" cried Milady.

    The chevalier raised his head, saw the two young women, and withoutstopping, waved his hand in a friendly way to Milady."The good George!"  said she, closing the window with an expression ofcountenance full of affection and melancholy.  And she resumed her seat,as if plunged in reflections entirely personal.

    "Dear lady," said Mme. Bonacieux, "pardon me for interrupting you; butwhat do you advise me to do?  Good heaven!  You have more experiencethan I have.  Speak; I will listen."

    "In the first place," said Milady, "it is possible I may be deceived,and that D'Artagnan and his friends may really come to your assistance.""Oh, that would be too much!"  cried Mme. Bonacieux, "so much happinessis not in store for me!"

    "Then you comprehend it would be only a question of time, a sort ofrace, which should arrive first.  If  your friends are the more speedy,you are to be saved; if the satellites of the cardinal, you are lost.""Oh, yes, yes; lost beyond redemption!  What, then, to do?  What to do?""There would be a very simple means, very natural--""Tell me what!"

    "To wait, concealed in the neighborhood, and assure yourself who are themen who come to ask for you."

    "But where can I wait?"

    "Oh, there is no difficulty in that.  I shall stop and conceal myself afew leagues hence until my brother can rejoin me.  Well, I take you withme; we conceal ourselves, and wait together."

    "But I shall not be allowed to go; I am almost a prisoner.""As they believe that I go in consequence of an order from the cardinal,no one will believe you anxious to follow me."

    "Well?"

    "Well!  The carriage is at the door; you bid me adieu; you mount thestep to embrace me a last time; my brother's servant, who comes to fetchme, is told how to proceed; he makes a sign to the postillion, and weset off at a gallop."

    "But D'Artagnan!  D'Artagnan!  if he comes?"

    "Shall we not know it?"

    "How?"

    "Nothing easier.  We will send my brother's servant back to Bethune,whom, as I told you, we can trust.  He shall assume a disguise, andplace himself in front of the convent.  If the emissaries of thecardinal arrive, he will take no notice; if it is Monsieur d'Artagnanand his friends, he will bring them to us."

    "He knows them, then?"

    "Doubtless.  Has he not seen Monsieur d'Artagnan at my house?""Oh, yes, yes; you are right.  Thus all may go well--all may be for thebest; but we do not go far from this place?"

    "Seven or eight leagues at the most.  We will keep on the frontiers, forinstance; and at the first alarm we can leave France.""And what can we do there?"

    "Wait."

    "But if they come?"

    "My brother's carriage will be here first."

    "If I should happen to be any distance from you when the carriage comesfor you--at dinner or supper, for instance?"

    "Do one thing."

    "What is that?"

    "Tell your good superior that in order that we may be as much togetheras possible,  you ask her permission to share my repast.""Will she permit it?"

    "What inconvenience can it be?"

    "Oh, delightful!  In this way we shall not be separated for an instant.""Well, go down to her, then, to make your request.  I feel my head alittle confused; I will take a turn in the garden.""Go and where shall I find you?"

    "Here, in an hour."

    "Here, in an hour.  Oh, you are so kind, and I am so grateful!""How can I avoid interesting myself for one who is so beautiful and soamiable? Are you not the beloved of one of my best friends?""Dear D'Artagnan!  Oh, how he will thank you!"

    "I hope so.  Now, then, all is agreed; let us go down.""You are going into the garden?"

    "Yes."

    "Go along this corridor, down a little staircase, and you are in it.""Excellent; thank you!"

    "And the two women parted, exchanging charming smiles.Milady had told the truth--her head was confused, for her ill-arrangedplans clashed one another like  chaos.  She required to be alone thatshe might put her thoughts a little into order.  She saw vaguely thefuture; but she stood in need of a little silence and quiet to give allher ideas, as yet confused, a distinct form and a regular plan.What was most pressing was to get Mme. Bonacieux away, and convey her toa place of safety, and there, if matters required, make her a hostage.Milady began to have doubts of the issue of this terrible duel, in whichher enemies showed as much perseverance as she did animosity.Besides, she felt as we feel when a storm is coming on--that this issuewas near, and could not fail to be terrible.

    The principal thing for her, then, was, as we have said, to keep Mme.Bonacieux in her power.  Mme. Bonacieux was the very life of D'Artagnan.This was more than his life, the life of the woman he loved; this was,in case of ill fortune, a means of temporizing and obtaining goodconditions.

    Now, this point was settled; Mme. Bonacieux, without any suspicion,accompanied her.  Once concealed with her at Armentieres, it would beeasy to make her believe that D'Artagnan had not come to Bethune.  Infifteen days at most, Rochefort would be back;  besides, during thatfifteen days she would have time to think how she could best avengeherself on the four friends.  She would not be  weary, thank God!  forshe should enjoy the sweetest pastime such events could accord a womanof her character--perfecting a beautiful vengeance.Revolving all this in her mind, she cast her eyes around her, andarranged the topography of the garden in her head.  Milady was like agood general who contemplates at the same time victory and defeat, andwho is quite prepared, according to the chances of the battle, to marchforward or to beat a retreat.

    At the end of an hour she heard a soft voice calling her; it was Mme.Bonacieux's.  The good abbess had naturally consented to her request;and as a commencement, they were to sup together.On reaching the courtyard, they heard the noise of a carriage whichstopped at the gate.

    Milady listened.

    "Do you hear anything?"  said she.

    "Yes, the rolling of a carriage."

    "It is the one my brother sends for us."

    "Oh, my God!"

    "Come, come!  courage!"

    The bell of the convent gate was sounded; Milady was not mistaken."Go to your chamber," said she to Mme. Bonacieux; "you have perhaps somejewels you would like to take."

    "I have his letters," said she.

    "Well, go and fetch them, and come to my apartment.  We will snatch somesupper; we shall perhaps travel part of the night, and must keep ourstrength up."

    "Great God!"  said Mme. Bonacieux, placing her hand upon her bosom, "myheart beats so I cannot walk."

    "Courage, courage!  remember that in a quarter of an hour you will besafe; and think that what you are about to do is for HIS sake.""Yes, yes, everything for him.  You have restored my courage by a singleword; go, I will rejoin  you."

    Milady ran up to her apartment quickly:  she there found Rochefort'slackey, and gave him his instructions.

    He was to wait at the gate; if by chance the Musketeers should appear,the carriage was to set off as fast as possible, pass around theconvent, and go and wait for Milady at a little village which wassituated at the other side of the wood.  In this case Milady would crossthe garden and gain the village on foot.  As we have already said,Milady was admirably acquainted with this part of France.If the Musketeers did not appear, things were to go on as had beenagreed; Mme. Bonacieux was to get into the carriage as if to bid heradieu, and she was to take away Mme. Bonacieux.

    Mme. Bonacieux came in; and to remove all suspicion, if she had any,Milady repeated to the lackey, before her, the latter part of herinstructions.

    Milady asked some questions about the carriage.  It was a chaise drawnby three horses, driven by a postillion; Rochefort's lackey wouldprecede it, as courier.

    Milady was wrong in fearing that Mme. Bonacieux would have anysuspicion.  The poor young woman was too pure to suppose that any femalecould be guilty of such perfidy; besides, the name of the Comtesse deWinter, which she had heard the abbess pronounce, was wholly unknown toher, and she was even ignorant that a woman had had so great and sofatal a share in the misfortune of her life.

    "You see," said she, when the lackey had gone out, "everything is ready.The abbess suspects nothing, and believes that I am taken by order ofthe cardinal.  This man goes to give his last orders; take the leastthing, drink a finger of wine, and let us be gone.""Yes," said Mme. Bonacieux, mechanically, "yes, let  us be gone."Milady made her a sign to sit down opposite, poured her a small glass ofSpanish wine, and helped her to the wing of a chicken."See," said she, "if everything does not second us!  Here is nightcoming on; by daybreak we shall have reached our retreat, and nobody canguess where we are.  Come, courage!  take something."Mme. Bonacieux ate a few mouthfuls mechanically, and just touched theglass with her lips.

    "Come, come!"  said Milady, lifting hers to her mouth, "do as I do."But at the moment the glass touched her lips, her hand remainedsuspended; she heard something on the road which sounded like therattling of a distant gallop.  Then it grew nearer, and it seemed toher, almost at the same time, that she heard the neighing of horses.This noise acted upon her joy like the storm which awakens the sleeperin the midst of a happy dream; she grew pale and ran to the window,while Mme. Bonacieux, rising all in a tremble, supported herself uponher chair to avoid falling.  Nothing was yet to be seen, only they heardthe galloping draw nearer.

    "Oh, my God!"  said Mme. Bonacieux, what is that noise?""That of either our friends or our enemies," said Milady, with herterrible coolness.  "Stay where you are, I will tell you."Mme. Bonacieux remained standing, mute, motionless, and pale as astatue.

    The noise became louder; the horses could not be more than a hundred andfifty paces distant.  If they were not yet to be seen, it was becausethe road made an elbow.  The noise became so distinct that the horsesmight be counted by the rattle of their hoofs.

    Milady gazed with all the power of her attention; it was just lightenough for her to see who was coming.

    All at once, at the turning of the road she saw the glitter of lacedhats and the waving of feathers; she counted two, then five, then eighthorsemen.  One of them preceded the rest by double the length of hishorse.

    Milady uttered a stifled groan.  In the first horseman she recognizedD'Artagnan.

    "Oh, my God, my God," cried Mme. Bonacieux, "what is it?""It is the uniform of the cardinal's Guards.  Not an instant to be lost!Fly, fly!"

    "Yes, yes, let us fly!"  repeated Mme. Bonacieux, but without being ableto make a step, glued as she was to the spot by terror.They heard the horsemen pass under the windows.

    "Come, then, come, then!"  cried Milady, trying to drag the young womanalong by the arm. "Thanks to the garden, we yet can flee; I have thekey, but make haste!  in five minutes it will be too late!"Mme. Bonacieux tried to walk, made two steps, and sank upon her knees.Milady tried to raise and carry her, but could not do it.At this moment they heard the rolling of the carriage, which at theapproach of the Musketeers set off at a gallop.  Then three or fourshots were fired.

    "For the last time, will you come?"  cried Milady."Oh, my God, my God!  you see my strength fails me; you see plainly Icannot walk.  Flee alone!"

    "Flee alone, and leave you here?  No, no, never!"  cried Milady.All at once she paused, a livid flash darted from her eyes; she ran tothe table, emptied into Mme. Bonacieux's glass the contents of a ringwhich she opened with singular quickness.  It was a grain of a reddishcolor, which dissolved immediately.

    Then, taking the glass with a firm hand, she said, "Drink.  This winewill give you strength, drink!"  And she put the glass to the lips ofthe young woman, who drank mechanically.

    "This is not the way that I wished to avenge myself," said Milady,replacing the glass upon the table, with an infernal smile, "but, myfaith!  we do what we can!"  And she rushed out of the room.Mme. Bonacieux saw her go without being able to follow her; she was likepeople who dream they are pursued, and who in vain try to walk.A few moments passed; a great noise was heard at the gate.  Everyinstant Mme. Bonacieux expected to see Milady, but she did not return.Several times, with terror, no doubt, the cold sweat burst from herburning brow.

    At length she heard the grating of the hinges of the opening gates; thenoise of boots and spurs resounded on the stairs.  There was a greatmurmur of voices which continued to draw near, amid which she seemed tohear her own name pronounced.

    All at once she uttered a loud cry of joy, and darted toward the door;she had recognized the voice of D'Artagnan.

    "D'Artagnan!  D'Artagnan!"  cried she, "is it you?  This way!  thisway!"

    "Constance?  Constance?"  replied the young man, "where are you? whereare you?  My God!"

    At the same moment the door of the cell yielded to a shock, rather thanopened; several men rushed into the chamber.  Mme. Bonacieux had sunkinto an armchair, without the power of moving.

    D'Artagnan threw down a yet-smoking pistol which he held in his hand,and fell on his knees before his mistress.  Athos replaced his in hisbelt; Porthos and Aramis, who held their drawn swords in their hands,returned them to their scabbards.

    "Oh, D'Artagnan, my beloved D'Artagnan!  You have come, then, at last!You have not deceived me!  It is indeed thee!"

    "Yes, yes, Constance.  Reunited!"

    "Oh, it was in vain she told me you would not come!  I hoped in silence.I was not willing to fly.  Oh, I have done well!  How happy I am!"At this word SHE, Athos, who had seated himself quietly, started up."SHE!  What she?"  asked D'Artagnan.

    "Why, my companion.  She who out of friendship for me wished to take mefrom my persecutors.  She who, mistaking you for the cardinal's Guards,has just fled away."

    "Your companion!"  cried D'Artagnan, becoming more pale than the whiteveil of his mistress.  "Of what companion are you speaking, dearConstance?"

    "Of her whose carriage was at the gate; of a woman who calls herselfyour friend; of a woman to whom  you have told everything.""Her name, her name!"  cried D'Artagnan.  "My God, can you not rememberher name?"

    "Yes, it was pronounced in my hearing once.  Stop--but--it is verystrange--oh, my God, my head swims!  I cannot see!""Help, help, my friends!  her hands are icy cold," cried D'Artagnan."She is ill!  Great God, she is losing her senses!"While Porthos was calling for help with all the power of his strongvoice, Aramis ran to the table to get a glass of water; but he stoppedat seeing the horrible alteration that had taken place in thecountenance of Athos, who, standing before the table, his hair risingfrom his head, his eyes fixed in stupor, was looking at one of theglasses, and appeared a prey to the most horrible doubt."Oh1'  said Athos, "oh, no, it is impossible!  God would not permit sucha crime!"

    "Water, water!"  cried D'Artagnan.  "Water!"

    "Oh, poor woman, poor woman!"  murmured Athos, in a broken voice.Mme. Bonacieux opened her eyes under the kisses of D'Artagnan."She revives!"  cried the young man.  "Oh, my  God, my God, I thankthee!"

    "Madame!"  said Athos, "madame, in the name of heaven, whose empty glassis this?"

    "Mine, monsieur," said the young woman, in a dying voice."But who poured the wine for you that was in this glass?""She."

    "But who is SHE?"

    "Oh, I remember!"  said Mme. Bonacieux, "the Comtesse de Winter."The four friends uttered one and the same cry, but that of Athosdominated all the rest.

    At that moment the countenance of Mme. Bonacieux became livid; a fearfulagony pervaded her frame, and she sank panting into the arms of Porthosand Aramis.

    D'Artagnan seized the hands of Athos with an anguish difficult to bedescribed.

    "And what do you believe?'  His voice was stifled by sobs."I believe everything," said Athos biting his lips till the blood sprangto avoid sighing.

    "D'Artagnan, D'Artagnan!"  cried Mme. Bonacieux, "where art thou?  Donot leave me!  You see I am dying!"

    D'Artagnan released the hands of Athos which he still held clasped inboth his own, and hastened to her.  Her beautiful face was distortedwith agony; her glassy eyes had no longer their sight; a convulsiveshuddering shook her whole body; the sweat rolled from her brow."In the name of heaven, run, call!  Aramis!  Porthos!  Call for help!""Useless!"  said Athos, "useless!  For the poison which SHE pours thereis no antidote."

    "Yes, yes!  Help, help!"  murmured Mme. Bonacieux; "help!"Then, collecting all her strength, she took the head of the young manbetween her hands, looked at him for an instant as if her whole soulpassed into that look, and with a sobbing cry pressed her lips to his."Constance, Constance!"  cried D'Artagnan.

    A sigh escaped from the mouth of Mme. Bonacieux, and dwelt for aninstant on the lips of D'Artagnan.  That sigh was the soul, so chasteand so loving, which reascended to heaven.

    D'Artagnan pressed nothing but a corpse in his arms.  The young manuttered a cry, and fell by the side of his mistress as pale and as icyas herself.

    Porthos wept; Aramis pointed toward heaven; Athos made the sign of thecross.

    At that moment a man appeared in the doorway, almost as pale as those inthe chamber.  He looked around him and saw Mme. Bonacieux dead, andD'Artagnan in a swoon.  He appeared just at that moment of stupor whichfollows great catastrophes.

    "I was not deceived," said he; "here is Monsieur D'Artagnan; and you arehis friends, Messieurs Athos, Porthos, and Aramis."The persons whose names were thus pronounced looked at the stranger withastonishment.  It seemed to all three that they knew him."Gentlemen," resumed the newcomer, "you are, as I am, in search of awoman who," added he, with a terrible smile, "must have passed this way,for I see a corpse."

    The three friends remained mute-for although the voice as well as thecountenance reminded them of someone they had seen, they could notremember  under what circumstances.

    "Gentlemen," continued the stranger, "since you do not recognize a manwho probably owes his life to you twice, I must name myself.  I am Lordde Winter, brother-in-law of THAT WOMAN."

    The three friends uttered a cry of surprise.

    Athos rose, and offering him his hand, "Be welcome, my Lord," said he,"you are one of us."

    "I set out five hours after her from Portsmouth," said Lord de Winter."I arrived three hours after her at Boulogne.  I missed her by twentyminutes at St. Omer.  Finally, at Lilliers I lost all trace of her.  Iwas going about at random,  inquiring of everybody, when I saw  yougallop past.  I recognized Monsieur d'Artagnan.  I called to  you, butyou did not answer me; I wished to follow you, but my horse was too muchfatigued to go at the same pace with yours.  And yet it appears, inspite of all your diligence, you have arrived too late.""You see!"  said Athos, pointing to Mme. Bonacieux dead, and toD'Artagnan, whom Porthos and Aramis were trying to recall to life."Are they both dead?"  asked Lord de Winter, sternly."No," replied Athos, "fortunately Monsieur d'Artagnan has only fainted.""Ah, indeed, so much the better!"  said Lord de Winter.At that moment D'Artagnan opened his eyes.  He tore himself from thearms of Porthos and Aramis, and threw himself like a madman on thecorpse of his mistress.

    Athos rose, walked toward his friend with a slow and solemn step,embraced him tenderly, and as he burst into violent sobs, he said to himwith his noble and persuasive voice, "Friend, be a man!  Women weep forthe dead; men avenge them!"

    "Oh, yes!"  cried D'Artagnan, "yes!  If it be to avenge her, I am readyto follow you."

    Athos profited by this moment of strength which the hope of vengeancerestored to his unfortunate friend to make a sign to Porthos and Aramisto go and fetch the superior.

    The two friends met her in the corridor, greatly troubled and much upsetby such strange events; she called some of the nuns, who against allmonastic custom found themselves in the presence of five men."Madame," said Athos, passing his arm under that of D'Artagnan, "weabandon to your pious care the body of that unfortunate woman.  She wasan angel on earth before being an angel  in heaven.  Treat her as one ofyour sisters.  We will return someday to pray over her grave."D'Artagnan concealed his face in the bosom of Athos, and sobbed aloud."Weep," said Athos, "weep, heart full of love, youth, and life!  Alas,would I could weep like you!"

    And he drew away his friend, as affectionate as a father, as consolingas a priest, noble as a man who has suffered much.All five, followed by their lackeys leading their horses, took their wayto the town of Bethune, whose outskirts they perceived, and stoppedbefore the first inn they came to.

    "But," said D'Artagnan, "shall we not pursue that woman?""Later," said Athos.  "I have measures to take."

    "She will escape us," replied the young man; "she will escape us, and itwill be your fault, Athos."

    "I will be accountable for her," said Athos.

    D'Artagnan had so much confidence in the word of his friend that helowered his head, and entered the inn without reply.Porthos and Aramis regarded each other, not understanding this assuranceof Athos.

    Lord de Winter believed he spoke in this manner to soothe the grief ofD'Artagnan.

    "Now, gentlemen," said Athos, when he had ascertained there were fivechambers free in the hotel, "let everyone retire to his own apartment.D'Artagnan needs to be alone, to weep and to sleep.  I take charge ofeverything; be easy."

    "It appears, however," said Lord de Winter, "if there are any measuresto take against the countess, it concerns me; she is my sister-in-law.""And me," said Athos,--she is my wife!"

    D'Artagnan smiled--for he understood that Athos was sure of hisvengeance when he revealed such a secret.  Porthos and Aramis looked ateach other, and grew pale.  Lord de Winter thought Athos was mad."Now, retire to your chambers," said Athos, "and leave me to act.  Youmust perceive that in my quality of a husband this concerns me.  Only,D'Artagnan, if you have not lost it, give me the paper which fell fromthat man's hat, upon which is written the name of the village of--""Ah," said D'Artagnan, "I comprehend!  that name written in her hand.""You see, then," said Athos, :there is a god in heaven still!"

    64  THE MAN IN THE RED CLOAK

    The despair of Athos had given place to a concentrated grief which onlyrendered more lucid the brilliant mental faculties of that extraordinaryman.

    Possessed by one single thought--that of the promise he had made, and ofthe responsibility he had taken--he retired last to his chamber, beggedthe host to procure him a map of the province, bent over it, examinedevery line traced upon it, perceived that there were four differentroads from Bethune to Armentieres, and summoned the lackeys.Planchet, Grimaud, Bazin, and Mousqueton presented themselves, andreceived clear, positive, and serious orders from Athos.They must set out the next morning at daybreak, and go to Armentieres--each by a different route.  Planchet, the most intelligent of the four,was to follow that by which the carriage had gone upon which the fourfriends had fired, and which was accompanied, as may be remembered, byRochefort's servant.

    Athos set the lackeys to work first because, since these men had been inthe service of himself and his friends he had discovered in each of themdifferent and essential qualities.  Then, lackeys who ask questionsinspire less mistrust than masters, and meet with more sympathy amongthose to whom they address themselves.  Besides, Milady knew themasters, and did not know the lackeys; on the contrary, the lackeys knewMilady perfectly.

    All four were to meet the next day at eleven o'clock.  If they haddiscovered Milady's retreat, three were to remain on guard; the fourthwas to return to Bethune in order to inform Athos and serve as a guideto the four friends.  These arrangements made, the lackeys retired.Athos then arose from his chair, girded on his sword, enveloped himselfin his cloak, and left the hotel.  It was nearly ten o'clock.  At teno'clock in the evening, it is well known, the streets in provincialtowns are very little frequented.  Athos nevertheless was visiblyanxious to find someone of whom he could ask a question.  At length hemet a belated passenger, went up to him, and spoke a few words to him.The man he addressed recoiled with terror, and only answered the fewwords of the Musketeer by pointing.  Athos offered the man half apistole to accompany him, but the man refused.

    Athos then plunged into the street the man had indicated with hisfinger; but arriving at four crossroads, he stopped again, visiblyembarrassed.  Nevertheless, as the crossroads offered him a betterchance than any other place of meeting somebody, he stood still.  In afew minutes a night watch passed.  Athos repeated to him the samequestion he had asked the first person he met.  The night watch evincedthe same terror, refused, in his turn, to accompany Athos, and onlypointed with his hand to the road he was to take.Athos walked in the direction indicated, and reached the suburb situatedat the opposite extremity of the city from that by which he and hisfriends had entered it.  There he again appeared uneasy and embarrassed,and stopped for the third time.

    Fortunately, a mendicant passed, who, coming up to Athos to ask charity,Athos offered him half a crown to accompany him where he was going.  Themendicant hesitated at first, but at the sight of the piece of silverwhich shone in the darkness he consented, and walked on before Athos.Arrived at the angle of a street, he pointed to a small house, isolated,solitary, and dismal.  Athos went toward the house, while the mendicant,who had received his reward, left as fast as his legs could carry him.Athos went round the house before he could distinguish the door, amidthe red color in which the house was painted.  No light appeared throughthe chinks of the shutters; no noise gave reason to believe that it wasinhabited.  It was dark and silent as the tomb.

    Three times Athos knocked without receiving an answer.  At the thirdknock, however, steps were heard inside.  The door at length was opened,and a man appeared, of high stature, pale complexion, and black hair andbeard.

    Athos and he exchanged some words in a low voice, then the tall man madea sign to the Musketeer that he might come in.  Athos immediatelyprofited by the permission, and the door was closed behind him.The man whom Athos had come so far to seek, and whom he had found withso much trouble, introduced him into his laboratory, where he wasengaged in fastening together with iron wire the dry bones of askeleton.  All the frame was adjusted except the head, which lay on thetable.

    All the rest of the furniture indicated that the dweller in this houseoccupied himself with the study of natural science.  There were largebottles filled with serpents, ticketed according to their species; driedlizards shone like emeralds set in great squares of black wood, andbunches of wild odoriferous herbs, doubtless possessed of virtuesunknown to common men, were fastened to the ceiling and hung down in thecorners of the apartment.  There was no family, no servant; the tall manalone inhabited this house.

    Athos cast a cold and indifferent glance upon the objects we havedescribed, and at the invitation of him whom he came to seek sat downnear him.

    Then he explained to him the cause of his visit, and the service herequired of him.  But scarcely had he expressed his request when theunknown, who remained standing before the Musketeer, drew back withsigns of terror, and refused.  Then Athos took from his pocket a smallpaper,  on which two lines were written, accompanied by a signature anda seal, and presented them to him who had made too prematurely thesesigns of repugnance.  The tall man had scarcely read these lines, seenthe signature, and recognized the seal, when he bowed to denote that hehad no longer any objection to make, and that he was ready to obey.Athos required no more.  He arose, bowed, went out, returned by the sameway he came, re-entered the hotel, and went to his apartment.At daybreak D'Artagnan entered the chamber, and demanded what was to bedone.

    "To wait," replied Athos.

    Some minutes after, the superior of the convent sent to inform theMusketeers that the burial would take place at midday.  As to thepoisoner, they had heard no tidings of her whatever, only that she musthave made her escape through the garden, on the sand of which herfootsteps could be traced, and the door of which had been found shut.As to the key, it had disappeared.

    At the hour appointed, Lord de Winter and the four friends repaired tothe convent; the bells tolled, the chapel was open, the grating of thechoir was closed.  In the middle of the choir the body of the victim,clothed in her novitiate dress, was exposed.  On each side of the choirand behind the gratings opening into the convent was assembled the wholecommunity of the Carmelites, who listened to the divine service, andmingled their chant with the chant of the priests, without seeing theprofane, or being seen by them.

    At the door of the chapel D'Artagnan felt his courage fall anew, andreturned to look for Athos; but Athos had disappeared.Faithful to his mission of vengeance, Athos had requested to beconducted to the garden; and there upon the sand following the lightsteps of this woman, who left sharp tracks wherever she went, headvanced toward the gate which led into the wood, and causing it to beopened, he went out into the forest.

    Then all his suspicions were confirmed; the road by which the carriagehad disappeared encircled the forest.  Athos followed the road for sometime, his eyes fixed upon the ground; slight stains of blood, which camefrom the wound inflicted upon the man who accompanied the carriage as acourier, or from one of the horses, dotted the road.  At the end ofthree-quarters of a league, within fifty paces of Festubert, a largerbloodstain appeared; the ground was trampled by horses.  Between theforest and this accursed spot, a little behind the trampled ground, wasthe same track of small feet as in the garden; the carriage had stoppedhere.  At this spot Milady had come out of the wood, and entered thecarriage.

    Satisfied with this discovery which confirmed all his suspicions, Athosreturned to the hotel, and found Planchet impatiently waiting for him.Everything was as Athos had foreseen.

    Planchet had followed the road; like Athos, he had discovered the stainsof blood; like Athos, he had noted the spot where the horses had halted.But he had gone farther than Athos--for at the village of Festubert,while drinking at an inn, he had learned without needing to ask aquestion that the evening before, at half-past eight, a wounded man whoaccompanied a lady traveling in a post-chaise had been obliged to stop,unable to go further.  The accident was set down to the account ofrobbers, who had stopped the chaise in the wood.  The man remained inthe village; the woman had had a relay of horses, and continued herjourney.

    Planchet went in search of the postillion who had driven her, and foundhim.  He   had taken the lady as far as Fromelles; and from Fromellesshe had set out for Armentieres.  Planchet took the crossroad, and byseven o'clock in the morning he was at Armentieres.There was but one tavern, the Post.  Planchet went and presented himselfas a lackey out of a place, who was in search of a situation.  He hadnot chatted ten minutes with the people of the tavern before he learnedthat a woman had come there alone about eleven o'clock the night before,had engaged a chamber, had sent for the master of the hotel, and toldhim she desired to remain some time in the neighborhood.Planchet had no need to learn more.  He hastened to the rendezvous,found the lackeys at their posts, placed them as sentinels at all theoutlets of the hotel, and came to find Athos, who ha just received thisinformation when his friends returned.

    All their countenances were melancholy and gloomy, even the mildcountenance of Aramis.

    "What is to be done?" asked D'Artagnan.

    "To wait!" replied Athos.

    Each retired to his own apartment.

    At eight o'clock in the evening Athos ordered the horses to be saddled,and Lord de Winter and his friends notified that they must prepare forthe expedition.

    In an instant all five were ready.  Each examined his arms, and put themin order.  Athos came down last, and found D'Artagnan already onhorseback, and growing impatient.

    "Patience!"  cried Athos; "one of our party is still wanting."The four horsemen looked round them with astonishment, for they soughtvainly in their minds to know who this other person could be.At this moment Planchet brought out Athos's house; the Musketeer leapedlightly into the saddle.

    "Wait for me," cried he, "I will soon be back," and he set off at agallop.

    In a quarter of an hour he returned, accompanied by a tall man, masked,and wrapped in a large red cloak.

    Lord de Winter and the three Musketeers looked at one anotherinquiringly.  Neither could give the others any information, for allwere ignorant who this man could be; nevertheless, they felt convincedthat all was as it should be, as it was done by the order of Athos.At nine o'clock, guided by Planchet, the little cavalcade set out,taking the route the carriage had taken.

    It was a melancholy sight--that of these six men, traveling in silence,each plunged in his own thoughts, sad as despair, gloomy aschastisement.

    65  TRIAL

    It was a stormy and dark night; vast clouds covered the heavens,concealing the stars; the moon would not rise till midnight.Occasionally, by the light of a flash of lightening which gleamed alongthe horizon, the road stretched itself before them, white and solitary;the flash extinct, all remained in darkness.

    Every minute Athos was forced to restrain D'Artagnan, constantly inadvance of the little troop, and to beg him to keep in the line, whichin an instant he again departed from.  He had but one thought--to goforward; and he went.

    They passed in silence through the little village of Festubert, wherethe wounded servant was, and then skirted the wood of Richebourg.  AtHerlier, Planchet, who led the column, turned to the left.Several times Lord de Winter, Porthos, or Aramis, tried to talk with theman in the red cloak; but to every interrogation which they put to himhe bowed, without response.  The travelers then comprehended that theremust be some reason why the unknown preserved such a silence, and ceasedto address themselves to him.

    The storm increase, the flashes succeeded one another more rapidly, thethunder began to growl, and the wind, the precursor of a hurricane,whistled in the plumes and the hair of the horsemen.The cavalcade trotted on more sharply.

    A little before they came to Fromelles the storm burst.  They spreadtheir cloaks.  There remained three leagues to travel, and they did itamid torrents of rain.

    D'Artagnan took off his hat, and could not be persuaded to make use ofhis cloak.  He found pleasure in feeling the water trickle over hisburning brow and over his body, agitated by feverish shudders.The moment the little troop passed Goskal and were approaching the Port,a man sheltered beneath a tree detached himself from the trunk withwhich he had been confounded in the darkness, and advanced into themiddle of the road, putting his finger on his lips.Athos recognized Grimaud.

    "What's the manner?" cried Athos.  "Has she left Armentieres?"Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative.  D'Artagnan groaned his teeth."Silence, D'Artagnan!"  said Athos.  I have charged myself with thisaffair.  It is for me, then, to interrogate Grimaud.""Where is she?"  asked Athos.

    Grimaud extended his hands in the direction of the Lys.  "Far fromhere?" asked Athos.

    Grimaud showed his master his forefinger bent.

    "Alone?"  asked Athos.

    Grimaud made the sign yes.

    "Gentlemen," said Athos, "she is alone within half a league of us, inthe direction of the river."

    "That's well," said D'Artagnan. "lead us, Grimaud."Grimaud took his course across the country, and acted as guide to thecavalcade.

    At the end of five hundred paces, more or less, they came to a rivulet,which they forded.

    By the aid of the lightening they perceived the village of Erquinheim."Is she there, Grimaud?"  asked Athos.

    Grimaud shook his head negatively.

    "Silence, then!"  cried Athos.

    And the troop continued their route.

    Another flash illuminated all around them.  Grimaud extended his arm,and by the bluish splendor of the fiery serpent they distinguished alittle isolated house on the banks of the river, within a hundred pacesof a ferry.

    One window was lighted.

    "Here we are!"  said Athos.

    At this moment a man who had been crouching in a ditch jumped up andcame towards them.  It was Mousqueton.  He pointed his finger to thelighted window.

    "She is there," said he.

    "And Bazin?"  asked Athos.

    "While I watched the window, he guarded the door.""Good!"  said Athos.  "You are good and faithful servants."Athos sprang from his horse, gave the bridle to Grimaud, and advancedtoward the window, after having made a sign to the rest of the troop togo toward the door.

    The little house was surrounded by a low, quickset hedge, two or threefeet high.  Athos sprang over the hedge and went up to the window, whichwas without shutters, but had the half-curtains closely drawn.He mounted the skirting stone that his eyes might look over the curtain.By the light of a lamp he saw a woman, wrapped in a dark mantle, seatedupon a stool near a dying fire.  Her elbows were placed upon a meantable, and she leaned her head upon her two hands, which were white asivory.

    He could not distinguish her countenance, but a sinister smile passedover the lips of Athos.  He was not deceived; it was she whom he sought.At this moment a horse neighed.  Milady raised her head, saw close tothe panes the pale face of Athos, and screamed.

    Athos, perceiving that she knew him, pushed the window with his knee andhand.  The window yielded.  The squares were broken to shivers; andAthos, like the spectre of vengeance, leaped into the room.Milady rushed to the door and opened it.  More pale and menacing thanAthos, D'Artagnan stood on the threshold.

    Milady recoiled, uttering a cry.  D'Artagnan, believing she might havemeans of flight and fearing she should escape, drew a pistol from hisbelt; but Athos raised his hand.

    "Put back that weapon, D'Artagnan!"  said he; "this woman must be tried,not assassinated.  Wait an instant, my friend, and you shall besatisfied.  Come in, gentlemen."

    D'Artagnan obeyed; for Athos had the solemn voice and the powerfulgesture of a judge sent by the Lord himself.  Behind D'Artagnan enteredPorthos, Aramis, Lord de Winter, and the man in the red cloak.The four lackeys guarded the door and the window.Milady had sunk into a chair, with her hands extended, as if to conjurethis terrible apparition.  Perceiving her brother-in-law, she uttered aterrible cry.

    "What do you want?"  screamed Milady.

    "We want," said Athos, "Charlotte Backson, who first was called Comtessede la Fere, and afterwards Milady de Winter, Baroness of Sheffield.""That is I!  that is I!"  murmured Milady, in extreme terror; "what doyou want?"

    "We wish to judge you according to your crime," said Athos; "you shallbe free to defend yourself.  Justify yourself if you can.  M.d'Artagnan, it is for you to accuse her first."

    D'Artagnan advanced.

    "Before God and before men," said he, "I accuse this woman of havingpoisoned Constance Bonacieux, who died yesterday evening."He turned towards Porthos and Aramis.

    "We bear witness to this," said the two Musketeers, with one voice.D'Artagnan continued:  "Before God and before men, I accuse this womanof having attempted to poison me, in wine which she sent me fromVilleroy, with a forged letter, as if that wine came from my friends.God preserved me, but a man named Brisemont died in my place.""We bear witness to this," said Porthos and Aramis, in the same manner as before."Before God and before men, I accuse this woman of having urged me tothe murder of the Baron de Wardes; but as no one else can attest thetruth of this accusation, I attest it myself.  I have done."  AndD'Artagnan passed to the other side of the room with Porthos and Aramis."Your turn, my Lord," said Athos.

    The baron came forward.

    "Before God and before men," said he, "I accuse this woman of havingcaused the assassination of the Duke of Buckingham.""The Duke of Buckingham assassinated!"  cried all present, with onevoice.

    "Yes," said the baron, "assassinated.  On receiving the warning letteryou wrote to me, I had this woman arrested, and gave her in charge to aloyal servant.  She corrupted this man; she placed the poniard in hishand; she made him kill the duke.  And at this moment, perhaps, Feltonis paying with his head for the crime of this fury!"A shudder crept through the judges at the revelation of these unknowncrimes.

    "That is not all," resumed Lord de Winter.  "My brother, who made youhis heir, died in three hours of a strange disorder which left lividtraces all over the body.  My sister, how did your husband die?""Horror!"  cried Porthos and Aramis.

    "Assassin of Buckingham, assassin of Felton, assassin of my brother, Idemand justice upon  you, and I swear that if it be not granted to me, Iwill execute it myself."

    And Lord de Winter ranged himself by the side of D'Artagnan, leaving theplace free for another accuser.

    Milady let her head sink between her two hands, and tried to recall herideas, whirling in a mortal vertigo.

    "My turn," said Athos, himself trembling as the lion trembles at thesight of the serpent--"my turn.  I married that woman when she was ayoung girl; I married her in opposition to the wishes of all my family;I gave her my wealth, I gave her my name; and one day I discovered thatthis woman was branded--this woman was marked with a FLEUR-DE-LIS on herleft shoulder."

    "Oh," said Milady, raising herself, "I defy you to find any tribunalwhich pronounced that infamous sentence against me.  I defy you to findhim who executed it."

    "Silence!"  said a hollow voice.  "It is for me to reply to that!"  Andthe man in the red cloak came forward in his turn."What man is that?  What man is that?"  cried Milady, suffocated byterror, her hair loosening itself, and rising above her lividcountenance as if alive.

    All eyes were turned towards this man--for to all except Athos he wasunknown.

    Even Athos looked at him with as much stupefaction as the others, for heknew not how he could in any way find himself mixed up with the horribledrama then unfolded.

    After approaching Milady with a slow and solemn step, so that the tablealone separated them, the unknown took off his mask.Milady for some time examined with increasing terror that pale face,framed with black hair and whiskers, the only expression of which wasicy impassibility.  Then she suddenly cried, "Oh, no, no!"  rising andretreating to the very wall.  "No, no!  it is an infernal apparition!It is not he!  Help, help!"  screamed she, turning towards the wall, asif she would tear an opening with her hands.

    "Who are you, then?"  cried all the witnesses of this scene."Ask that woman," said the man in the red cloak, "for you may plainlysee she knows me!"

    "The executioner of Lille, the executioner of Lille!"  cried Milady, aprey to insensate terror, and clinging with her hands to the wall toavoid falling.

    Every one drew back, and the man in the red cloak remained standingalone in the middle of the room.

    "Oh, grace, grace, pardon!" cried the wretch, falling on her knees.The unknown waited for silence, and then resumed, "I told you well thatshe would know me.  Yes, I am the executioner of Lille, and this is myhistory."

    All eyes were fixed upon this man, whose words were listened to withanxious attention.

    "That woman was once a young girl, as beautiful as she is today.  Shewas a nun in the convent of the Benedictines of Templemar.  A youngpriest, with a simple and trustful heart, performed the duties of thechurch of that convent.  She undertook his seduction, and succeeded; shewould have seduced a saint.

    "Their vows were sacred and irrevocable.  Their connection could notlast long without ruining both.  She prevailed upon him to leave thecountry; but to leave the country, to fly together, to reach anotherpart of France, where they might live at ease because unknown, money wasnecessary.  Neither had any.  The priest stole the sacred vases, andsold them; but as they were preparing to escape together, they were botharrested.

    "Eight days later she had seduced the son of the jailer, and escaped.The young priest was condemned to ten years of imprisonment, and to bebranded.  I was executioner of the city of Lille, as this woman hassaid.  I was obliged to brand the guilty one; and he, gentlemen, was mybrother!

    "I then swore that this woman who had ruined him, who was more than hisaccomplice, since she had urged him to the crime, should at least sharehis punishment.  I suspected where she was concealed.  I followed her, Icaught her, I bound her; and I imprinted the same disgraceful mark uponher that I had imprinted upon my poor brother.

    "The day after my return to Lille, my brother in his turn succeeded inmaking his escape; I was accused of complicity, and was condemned toremain in his place till he should be again a prisoner.  My poor brotherwas ignorant of this sentence.  He rejoined this woman; they fledtogether into Berry, and there he obtained a little curacy.  This womanpassed for his sister.

    "The Lord of the estate on which the chapel of the curacy was situatedsaw this pretend sister, and became enamoured of her--amorous to such adegree that he proposed to marry her.  Then she quitted him she hadruined for him she was destined to ruin, and became the Comtesse de laFere--"

    All eyes were turned towards Athos, whose real name that was, and whomade a sign with his head that all was true which the executioner hadsaid.

    "Then," resumed he, "mad, desperate, determined to get rid of anexistence from which she had stolen everything, honor and happiness, mypoor brother returned to Lille, and learning the sentence which hadcondemned me in his place, surrendered himself, and hanged himself thatsame night from the iron bar of the loophole of his prison."To do justice to them who had condemned me, they kept their word.  Assoon as the identity of my brother was proved, I was set at liberty."That is the crime of which I accuse her; that is the cause for whichshe was branded."

    "Monsieur d'Artagnan," said Athos, "what is the penalty you demandagainst this woman?"

    "The punishment of death," replied D'Artagnan.

    "My Lord de Winter," continued Athos, "what is the penalty you demandagainst this woman?"

    "The punishment of death," replied Lord de Winter."Messieurs Porthos and Aramis," repeated Athos, "you who are her judges,what is the sentence you pronounce upon this woman?""The punishment of death," replied the Musketeers, in a hollow voice.Milady uttered a frightful shriek, and dragged herself along severalpaces upon her knees toward her judges.

    Athos stretched out his hand toward her.

    "Charlotte Backson, Comtesse de la Fere, Milady de Winter," said he,"your crimes have wearied men on earth and God in heaven.  If you know aprayer, say it--for you are condemned, and you shall die."At these words, which left no hope, Milady raised herself in all herpride, and wished to speak; but her strength failed her.  She felt thata powerful and implacable hand seized her by the hair, and dragged heraway as irrevocably as fatality drags humanity.  She did not, therefore,even attempt the least resistance, and went out of the cottage.Lord de Winter, D'Artagnan, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, went out closebehind her.  The lackeys followed their masters, and the chamber wasleft solitary, with its broken window, its open door, and its smoky lampburning sadly on the table.

    66  EXECUTION

    It was near midnight; the moon, lessened by its decline, and reddened bythe last traces of the storm, arose behind the little town ofArmentieres, which showed against its pale light the dark outline of itshouses, and the skeleton of its high belfry.  In front of them the Lysrolled its waters like a river of molten tin; while on the other sidewas a black mass of trees, profiled on a stormy sky, invaded by largecoppery clouds which created a sort of twilight amid the night.  On theleft was an old abandoned mill, with its motionless wings, from theruins of which an owl threw out its shrill, periodical, and monotonouscry.  On the right and on the left of the road, which the dismalprocession pursued, appeared a few low, stunted trees, which looked likedeformed dwarfs crouching down to watch men traveling at this sinisterhour.

    >From time to time a broad sheet of lightning opened the horizon in itswhole width, darted like a serpent over the black mass of trees, andlike a terrible scimitar divided the heavens and the waters into twoparts.  Not a breath of wind now disturbed the heavy atmosphere.  Adeathlike silence oppressed all nature.  The soil was humid andglittering with the rain which had recently fallen, and the refreshedherbs sent forth their perfume with additional energy.Two lackeys dragged Milady, whom each held by one arm.  The executionerwalked behind them, and Lord de Winter, D'Artagnan, Porthos, and Aramiswalked behind the executioner.  Planchet and Bazin came last.The two lackeys conducted Milady to the bank of the river.  Her mouthwas mute; but her eyes spoke with their inexpressible eloquence,supplicating by turns each of those on whom she looked.Being a few paces in advance she whispered to the lackeys, "A thousandpistoles to each of you, if you will assist my escape; but if youdeliver me up to your masters, I have near at hand avengers who willmake you pay dearly for my death."

    Grimaud hesitated.  Mousqueton trembled in all his members.Athos, who heard Milady's voice, came sharply up.  Lord de Winter didthe same.

    "Change these lackeys," said he; "she has spoken to them.  They are nolonger sure."

    Planchet and Bazin were called, and took the places of Grimaud andMousqueton.

    On the bank of the river the executioner approached Milady, and boundher hands and feet.

    Then she broke the silence to cry out, "You are cowards, miserableassassins--ten men combined to murder one woman.  Beware!  If I am notsaved I shall be avenged."

    "You are not a woman," said Athos, coldly and sternly.  "You do notbelong to the human species; you are a demon escaped from hell, whitherwe send you back again."

    "Ah, you virtuous men!"  said Milady; "please to remember that he whoshall touch a hair of my head is himself an assassin.""The executioner may kill, without being on that account an assassin,"said the man in the red cloak, rapping upon his immense sword.  "This isthe last judge; that is all.  NACHRICHTER, as say our neighbors, theGermans."

    And as he bound her while saying these words, Milady uttered two orthree savage cries, which produced a strange and melancholy effect inflying away into the night, and losing themselves in the depths of thewoods.

    "If I am guilty, if I have committed the crimes you accuse me of,"shrieked Milady, "take me before a tribunal.  You are not judges!  Youcannot condemn me!"

    "I offered you Tyburn," said Lord de Winter.  "Why did you not acceptit?"

    "Because I am not willing to die!"  cried Milady, struggling.  "BecauseI am too young to die!"

    "The woman you poisoned at Bethune was still younger than you, madame,and yet she is dead," said D'Artagnan.

    "I will enter a cloister; I will become a nun," said Milady."You were in a cloister," said the executioner, "and you left it to ruinmy brother."

    Milady uttered a cry of terror and sank upon her knees.  The executionertook her up in his arms and was carrying her toward the boat."Oh, my God!"  cried she, "my God!  are you going to drown me?"These cries had something so heartrending in them that M. d'Artagnan,who had been at first the most eager in pursuit of Milady, sat down onthe stump of a tree and hung his head, covering his ears with the palmsof his hands; and yet, notwithstanding, he could still hear her cry andthreaten.

    D'Artagnan was the youngest of all these men.  His heart failed him."Oh, I cannot behold this frightful spectacle!"  said he.  "I cannotconsent that this woman should die thus!"

    Milady heard these few words and caught at a shadow of hope."D'Artagnan, D'Artagnan!"  cried she; "remember that I loved you!"The young man rose and took a step toward her.

    But Athos rose likewise, drew his sword, and placed himself in the way."If you take one step farther, D'Artagnan," said he, "we shall crossswords together."

    D'Artagnan sank on his knees and prayed.

    "Come," continued Athos, "executioner, do your duty.""Willingly, monseigneur," said the executioner; "for as I am a goodCatholic, I firmly believe I am acting justly in performing my functionson this woman."

    "That's well."

    Athos made a step toward Milady.

    "I pardon you," said he, "the ill you have done me.  I pardon you for myblasted future, my lost honor, my defiled love, and my salvation forevercompromised by the despair into which you have cast me.  Die in peace!"Lord de Winter advanced in his turn.

    "I pardon you," said he, "for the poisoning of my brother, and theassassination of his Grace, Lord Buckingham.  I pardon you for the deathof poor Felton; I pardon you for the attempts upon my own person.  Diein peace!"

    "And I," said M. d'Artagnan.  "Pardon me, madame, for having by a trickunworthy of a gentleman provoked your anger; and I, in exchange, pardonyou the murder of my poor love and your cruel vengeance against me.  Ipardon you, and I weep for you.  Die in peace!"

    "I am lost!"  murmured Milady in English.  "I must die!"Then she arose of herself, and cast around her one of those piercinglooks which seemed to dart from an eye of flame.

    She saw nothing; she listened, and she heard nothing."Where am I to die?" said she.

    "On the other bank," replied the executioner.

    Then he placed her in the boat, and as he was going to set foot in ithimself, Athos handed him a sum of silver.

    "Here," said he, "is the price of the execution, that it may be plain weact as judges."

    "That is correct," said the executioner; "and now in her turn, let thiswoman see that I am not fulfilling my trade, but my debt."And he threw the money into the river.

    The boat moved off toward the left-hand shore of the Lys, bearing theguilty woman and the executioner; all the others remained on the right-hand bank, where they fell on their knees.

    The boat glided along the ferry rope under the shadow of a pale cloudwhich hung over the water at that moment.

    The troop of friends saw it gain the opposite bank; the figures weredefined like black shadows on the red-tinted horizon.Milady, during the passage had contrived to untie the cord whichfastened her feet.  On coming near the bank, she jumped lightly on shoreand took to flight.  But the soil was moist; on reaching the top of thebank, she slipped and fell upon her knees.

    She was struck, no doubt, with a superstitious idea; she conceived thatheaven denied its aid, and she remained in the attitude in which she hadfallen, her head drooping and her hands clasped.

    Then they saw from the other bank the executioner raise both his armsslowly; a moonbeam fell  upon the blade of the large sword.  The twoarms fell with a sudden force; they heard the hissing of the scimitarand the cry of the victim, then a truncated mass sank beneath the blow.The executioner then took off his red cloak, spread it upon the ground,laid the body in it, threw in the head, tied all up by the four corners,lifted it on his back, and entered the boat again.In the middle of the stream he stopped the boat, and suspending hisburden over the water cried in a loud voice, "Let the justice of God bedone!"  and he let the corpse drop into the depths of the waters, whichclosed over it.

    Three days afterward the four Musketeers were in Paris; they had notexceeded their leave of absence, and that same evening they went to paytheir customary visit to M. de Treville.

    "Well, gentlemen," said the brave captain, "I hope you have been wellamused during your excursion."

    "Prodigiously," replied Athos in the name of himself and his comrades.

    67 CONCLUSION

    On the sixth of the following month the king, in compliance with thepromise he had made the cardinal to return to La Rochelle, left hiscapital still in amazement at the news which began to spread itself ofBuckingham's assassination.

    Although warned that the man she had loved so much was in great danger,the queen, when his death was announced to her, would not believe thefact, and even imprudently exclaimed, "it is false; he has just writtento me!"

    But the next day she was obliged to believe this fatal intelligence;Laporte, detained in England, as everyone else had been, by the ordersof Charles I, arrived, and was the bearer of the duke's dying gift tothe queen.

    The joy of the king was lively.  He did not even give himself thetrouble to dissemble, and displayed it with affectation before thequeen.  Louis XIII, like very weak mind, was wanting in generosity.But the king soon again became dull and indisposed; his brow was not oneof those that long remain clear.  He felt that in returning to camp heshould re-enter slavery; nevertheless, he did return.The cardinal was for him the fascinating serpent, and himself the birdwhich flies from branch to branch without power to escape.The return to La Rochelle, therefore, was profoundly dull.  Our fourfriends, in particular, astonished their comrades; they traveledtogether, side by side, with sad eyes and heads lowered.  Athos alonefrom time to time raised his expansive brow; a flash kindled in hiseyes, and a bitter smile passed over his lips, then, like his comrades,he sank again into reverie.

    As soon as the escort arrived in a city, when they had conducted theking to his quarters the four friends either retired to their own or tosome secluded cabaret, where they neither drank nor played; they onlyconversed in a low voice, looking around attentively to see that no oneoverheard them.

    One day, when the king had halted to fly the magpie, and the fourfriends, according to their custom, instead of following the sport hadstopped at a cabaret on the high road, a man coming from la Rochelle onhorseback pulled up at the door to drink a glass of wine, and darted asearching glance into the room where the four Musketeers were sitting."Holloa, Monsieur d'Artagnan!"  said he, "is not that you whom I seeyonder?"

    D'Artagnan raised his head and uttered a cry of joy.  It was the man hecalled his phantom; it was his stranger of Meung, of the Rue desFossoyeurs and of Arras.

    D'Artagnan drew his sword, and sprang toward the door.But this time, instead of avoiding him the stranger jumped from hishorse, and advanced to meet D'Artagnan.

    "Ah, monsieur!"  said the young man, "I meet you, then, at last!  Thistime  you shall not escape me!"

    "Neither is it my intention, monsieur, for this time I was seeking you;in the name of the king, I arrest you."

    "How!  what do you say?"  cried D'Artagnan.

    "I say that you must surrender your sword to me, monsieur, and thatwithout resistance.  This concerns your head, I warn you.""Who are you, then?"  demanded D'Artagnan, lowering the point of hissword, but without yet surrendering it.

    "I am the Chevalier de Rochefort," answered the other, "the equerry ofMonsieur le Cardinal Richelieu, and I have orders to conduct you to hisEminence."

    "We are returning to his Eminence, monsieur the Chevalier," said Athos,advancing; "and you will please to accept the word of Monsieurd'Artagnan that he will go straight to La Rochelle.""I must place him in the hands of guards who will take him  into camp.""We will be his guards, monsieur, upon our word as gentlemen; butlikewise, upon our word as gentlemen," added Athos, knitting his brow,"Monsieur d'Artagnan shall not leave us."

    The Chevalier de Rochefort cast a glance backward, and saw that Porthosand Aramis had placed themselves between him and the gate; he understoodthat he was completely at the mercy of these four men."Gentlemen," said he, "if Monsieur d'Artagnan will surrender his swordto me and join his word to yours, I shall be satisfied with your promiseto convey Monsieur d'Artagnan to the quarters of Monseigneur theCardinal."

    "You have my word, monsieur, and here is my sword.""This suits me the better," said Rochefort, "as I wish to continue myjourney."

    "If it is for the purpose of rejoining Milady," said Athos, coolly, "itis useless; you will not find her."

    "What has become of her, then?"  asked Rochefort, eagerly."Return to camp and you shall know."

    Rochefort remained for a moment in thought; then, as they were only aday's journey from Surgeres, whither the cardinal was to come to meetthe king, he resolved to follow the advice of Athos and go with them.Besides, this return offered him the advantage of watching his prisoner.They resumed their route.

    On the morrow, at three o'clock in the afternoon, they arrived atSurgeres.  The cardinal there awaited Louis XIII.  The minister and theking exchanged numerous caresses, felicitating each other upon thefortunate chance which had freed France from the inveterate enemy whoset all Europe against her.  After which, the cardinal, who had beeninformed that D'Artagnan was arrested and who was anxious to see him,took leave of the king, inviting him to come the next day to view thework already done upon the dyke.

    On returning in the evening to his quarters at the bridge of La Pierre,the cardinal found, standing before the house he occupied, D'Artagnan,without his sword, and the three Musketeers armed.This time, as he was well attended, he looked at them sternly, and madea sign with his eye and hand for D'Artagnan to follow him.D'Artagnan obeyed.

    "We shall wait for you, D'Artagnan," said Athos, loud enough for thecardinal to hear him.

    His Eminence bent his brow, stopped for an instant, and then kept on hisway without uttering a single word.

    D'Artagnan entered after the cardinal, and behind D'Artagnan the doorwas guarded.

    His Eminence entered the chamber which served him as a study, and made asign to Rochefort to bring in the young Musketeer.Rochefort obeyed and retired.

    D'Artagnan remained alone in front of the cardinal; this was his secondinterview with Richelieu, and he afterward confessed that he felt wellassured it would be his last.

    Richelieu remained standing, leaning against the mantelpiece; a tablewas between him and D'Artagnan.

    "Monsieur," said the cardinal, "you have been arrested by my orders.""So they tell me, monseigneur."

    "Do you know why?"

    "No, monseigneur, for the only thing for which I could be arrested isstill unknown to your Eminence."

    Richelieu looked steadfastly at the young man.

    "Holloa!"  said he, "what does that mean?"

    "If Monseigneur will have the goodness to tell me, in the first place,what crimes are imputed to me, I will then tell him the deeds I havereally done."

    "Crimes are imputed to you which had brought down far loftier heads thanyours, monsieur," said the cardinal.

    "What, monseigneur?"  said D'Artagnan, with a calmness which astonishedthe cardinal himself.

    "You are charged with having corresponded with the enemies of thekingdom; you are charged with having surprised state secrets; you arecharged with having tried to thwart the plans of your general.""And who charges me with this, monseigneur?"  said D'Artagnan, who hadno doubt the accusation came from Milady, "a woman branded by thejustice of the country; a woman who has espoused one man in France andanother in England; a woman who poisoned her second husband and whoattempted both to poison and assassinate me!"

    "What do you say, monsieur?"  cried the cardinal, astonished; "and ofwhat woman are you speaking thus?"

    "Of Milady de Winter," replied D'Artagnan, "yes, of Milady de Winter, ofwhose crimes your Eminence is doubtless ignorant, since you have honoredher with your confidence."

    "Monsieur," said the cardinal, "if Milady de Winter has committed thecrimes you lay to her charge, she shall be punished.""She has been punished, monseigneur."

    "And who has punished her?"

    "We."

    "She is in prison?"

    "She is dead."

    "Dead!" repeated the cardinal, who could not believe what he heard,"dead!  Did you not say she was dead?"

    "Three times she attempted to kill me, and I pardoned her; but shemurdered the woman I loved.  Then my friends and I took her, tried her,and condemned her."

    D'Artagnan then related the poisoning of Mme. Bonacieux in the conventof the Carmelites at Bethune, the trial in the isolated house, and theexecution on the banks of the Lys.

    A shudder crept through the body of the cardinal, who did not shudderreadily.

    But all at once, as if undergoing the influence of an unspoken thought,the countenance of the cardinal, till then gloomy, cleared up bydegrees, and recovered perfect serenity.

    "So," said the cardinal, in a tone that contrasted strongly with theseverity of his words, "you have  constituted yourselves judges, withoutremembering that they who punish without license to punish areassassins?"

    "Monseigneur, I swear to you that I never for an instant had theintention of defending my head against you.  I willingly submit to anypunishment your Eminence may please to inflict upon me.  I do not holdlife dear enough to be afraid of death."

    "Yes, I know you are a man of a stout heart, monsieur," said thecardinal, with a voice almost affectionate; "I can therefore tell youbeforehand you shall be tried, and even condemned.""Another might reply to your Eminence that he had his pardon in hispocket.  I content myself with saying:  Command, monseigneur; I amready."

    "Your pardon?" said Richelieu, surprised.

    "Yes, monseigneur," said D'Artagnan.

    "And signed by whom--by the king?"  And the cardinal pronounced thesewords with a singular expression of contempt.

    "No, by your Eminence."

    "By me?  You are insane, monsieur."

    "Monseigneur will doubtless recognize his own handwriting."And D'Artagnan presented to the cardinal the precious piece of paperwhich Athos had forced from Milady, and which he had given to D'Artagnanto serve him as a safeguard.

    His Eminence took the paper, and read in a slow voice, dwelling uponevery syllable:

    "Dec. 3, 1627

    "It is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of this has done what he has done."RICHELIEU"

    The cardinal, after having read these two lines, sank into a profoundreverie; but he did not return the paper to D'Artagnan."He is meditating by what sort of punishment he shall cause me to die,"said the Gascon to himself.  "Well, my faith!  he shall see how agentleman can die."

    The young Musketeer was in excellent disposition to die heroically.Richelieu still continued thinking, rolling and unrolling the paper inhis hands.

    At length he raised his head, fixed his eagle look upon that loyal,open, and intelligent countenance, read upon that face, furrowed withtears, all the sufferings its possessor had endured in the course of amonth, and reflected for the third or fourth time how much there was inthat youth of twenty-one years before him, and what resources hisactivity, his courage, and his shrewdness might offer to a good master.On the other side, the crimes, the power, and the infernal genius ofMilady had more than once terrified him.  He felt something like asecret joy at being forever relieved of this dangerous accomplice.Richelieu slowly tore the paper which D'Artagnan had generouslyrelinquished.

    "I am lost!"  said D'Artagnan to himself.  And he bowed profoundlybefore the cardinal, like a man who says, "Lord, Thy will be done!"The cardinal approached the table, and without sitting down, wrote a fewlines upon a parchment of which two-thirds were already filled, andaffixed his seal.

    "That is my condemnation," thought D'Artagnan; "he will spare me theENNUI of the Bastille, or the tediousness of a trial.  That's very kindof him."

    "Here, monsieur," said the cardinal to the young man.  "I have takenfrom you one CARTE BLANCHE to give you another.  The name is wanting inthis commission; you can write it yourself."

    D'Artagnan took the paper hesitatingly and cast his eyes over it; it wasa lieutenant's commission in the Musketeers.

    D'Artagnan fell at the feet of the cardinal.

    "Monseigneur," said he, "my life is yours; henceforth dispose of it.But this favor which you bestow upon me I do not merit.  I have threefriends who are more meritorious and more worthy--""You are a brave youth, D'Artagnan," interrupted the cardinal, tappinghim familiarly on the shoulder, charmed at having vanquished thisrebellious nature.  "Do with this commission what you will; onlyremember, though the name be blank, it is to you I give it.""I shall never forget it," replied D'Artagnan.  "Your Eminence may becertain of that."

    The cardinal turned and said in a loud voice, "Rochefort!"  Thechevalier, who no doubt was near the door, entered immediately."Rochefort," said the cardinal, "you see Monsieur d'Artagnan.  I receivehim among the number of my friends.  Greet each other, then; and be wiseif you wish to preserve your heads."

    Rochefort and D'Artagnan coolly greeted each other with their lips; butthe cardinal was there, observing them with his vigilant eye.They left the chamber at the same time.

    "We shall meet again, shall we not, monsieur?"

    "When you please," said D'Artagnan.

    "An opportunity will come," replied Rochefort.

    "Hey?"  said the cardinal, opening the door.

    The two men smiled at each other, shook hands, and saluted his Eminence."We were beginning to grow impatient," said Athos."Here I am, my friends," replied D'Artagnan; "not only free, but infavor."

    "Tell us about it."

    "This evening; but for the moment, let us separate."Accordingly, that same evening D'Artagnan repaired to the quarters ofAthos, whom he found in a fair way to empty a bottle of Spanish wine--anoccupation which he religiously accomplished every night.D'Artagnan related what had taken place between the cardinal andhimself, and drawing the commission from his pocket, said, "Here, mydear Athos, this naturally belongs to you."

    Athos smiled with one of his sweet and expressive smiles."Friend," said he, "for Athos this is too much; for the Comte de la Fereit is too little.  Keep the commission; it is yours.  Alas!  you havepurchased it dearly enough."

    D'Artagnan left Athos's chamber and went to that of Porthos.  He foundhim clothed in a magnificent dress covered with splendid embroidery,admiring himself before a glass.

    "Ah, ah!  is that you, dear friend?"  exclaimed Porthos.  "How do youthink these garments fit me?"

    "Wonderfully," said D'Artagnan; but I come to offer you a dress whichwill become you still better."

    "What?"  asked Porthos.

    "That of a lieutenant of Musketeers."

    D'Artagnan related to Porthos the substance of his interview with thecardinal, and said, taking the commission from his pocket, "Here, myfriend, write your name upon it and become my chief."Porthos cast his eyes over the commission and returned it to D'Artagnan,to the great astonishment of the young man.

    "Yes," said he, "yes, that would flatter me very much; but I should nothave time enough to enjoy the distinction.  During our expedition toBethune the husband of my duchess died; so, my dear, the coffer of thedefunct holding out its arms to me, I shall marry the widow.  Look here!I was trying on my wedding suit.  Keep the lieutenancy, my dear, keepit."

    The young man then entered the apartment of Aramis.  He found himkneeling before a PRIEDIEU with his head leaning on an open prayer book.He described to him his interview with the cardinal, and said, for thethird time drawing his commission from his pocket, "You, our friend, ourintelligence, our invisible protector, accept this commission.  You havemerited it more than any of us by your wisdom and your counsels, alwaysfollowed by such happy results."

    "Alas, dear friend!"  said Aramis, "our late adventures have disgustedme with military life.  This time my determination is irrevocably taken.After the siege I shall enter the house of the Lazarists.  Keep thecommission, D'Artagnan; the profession of arms suits you.  You will be abrave and adventurous captain."

    D'Artagnan, his eye moist with gratitude though beaming with joy, wentback to Athos, whom he found still at table contemplating the charms ofhis last glass of Malaga by the light of his lamp."Well," said he, "they likewise have refused me.""That, dear friend, is because nobody is more worthy than yourself."He took a quill, wrote the name of D'Artagnan in the commission, andreturned it to him.

    "I shall then have no more friends," said the young man.  "Alas!nothing but bitter recollections."

    And he let his head sink upon his hands, while two large tears rolleddown his cheeks.

    "You are young," replied Athos; "and your bitter recollections have timeto change themselves into sweet remembrances."

    EPILOGUE

    La Rochelle, deprived of the assistance of the English fleet and of thediversion promised by Buckingham, surrendered after a siege of a year.On the twenty-eighth of October, 1628, the capitulation was signed.The king made his entrance into Paris on the twenty-third of December ofthe same year.  He was received in triumph, as if he came fromconquering an enemy and not Frenchmen.  He entered by the Faubourg St.Jacques, under verdant arches.

    D'Artagnan took possession of his command.  Porthos left the service,and in the course of the following year married Mme. Coquenard; thecoffer so much coveted contained eight hundred thousand livres.Mousqueton had a magnificent livery, and enjoyed the satisfaction ofwhich he had been ambitious all his life--that of standing behind agilded carriage.

    Aramis, after a journey into Lorraine, disappeared all at once, andceased to write to his friends; they learned at a later period throughMme. de Chevreuse, who told it to two or three of her intimates, that,yielding to his vocation, he had retired into a convent--only intowhich, nobody knew.

    Bazin became a lay brother.

    Athos remained a Musketeer under the command of D'Artagnan till the year1633, at which period, after a journey he made to Touraine, he also quitthe service, under the pretext of having inherited a small property inRoussillon.

    Grimaud followed Athos.

    D'Artagnan fought three times with Rochefort, and wounded him threetimes.

    "I shall probably kill you the fourth," said he to him, holding out hishand to assist him to rise.

    "It is much better both for  you and for me to stop where we are,"answered the wounded man.  "CORBLEU--I am more your friend than youthink--for after our very first encounter, I could by saying a word tothe cardinal have had your throat cut!"

    They this time embraced heartily, and without retaining any malice.Planchet obtained from Rochefort the rank of sergeant in the Piedmontregiment.

    M. Bonacieux lived on very quietly, wholly ignorant of what had become of hiswife, and caring very little about it.  One day he had the imprudence torecall himself to the memory of the cardinal.  The cardinal had him informed that he would provide for him so that he should never want for anything infuture.  In fact, M. Bonacieux, having left his house at seven o'clock in theevening to go to the Louvre, never appeared again in the Rue des Fossoyeurs;the opinion of those who seemed to be best informed was that he was fed andlodged in some royal castle, at the expense of his generous Eminence.

    End

    The Three Musketeers

    by Alexandre Dumas [Pere]

    AUTHOR'S PREFACE

    In which it is proved that, notwithstanding their names' endingin OS and IS, the heroes of the story which we are about to havethe honor to relate to our readers have nothing mythologicalabout them.

    A short time ago, while making researches in the Royal Libraryfor my History of Louis XIV, I stumbled by chance upon theMemoirs of M. D'Artagnan, printed--as were most of the works ofthat period, in which authors could not tell the truth withoutthe risk of a residence, more or less long, in the Bastille--atAmsterdam, by Pierre Rouge.  The title attracted me; I took themhome with me, with the permission of the guardian, and devouredthem.

    It is not my intention here to enter into an analysis of thiscurious work; and I shall satisfy myself with referring such ofmy readers as appreciate the pictures of the period to its pages.They will therein find portraits penciled by the hand of amaster; and although these squibs may be, for the most part,traced upon the doors of barracks and the walls of cabarets, theywill not find the likenesses of Louis XIII, Anne of Austria,Richelieu, Mazarin, and the courtiers of the period, lessfaithful than in the history of M. Anquetil.

    But, it is well known, what strikes the capricious mind of thepoet is not always what affects the mass of readers.  Now, whileadmiring, as others doubtless will admire, the details we have torelate, our main preoccupation concerned a matter to which no onebefore ourselves had given a thought.

    D'Artagnan relates that on his first visit to M. de Treville,captain of the king's Musketeers, he met in the antechamber threeyoung men, serving in the illustrious corps into which he wassoliciting the honor of being received, bearing the names ofAthos, Porthos, and Aramis.

    We must confess these three strange names struck us; and itimmediately occurred to us that they were but pseudonyms, underwhich D'Artagnan had disguised names perhaps illustrious, or elsethat the bearers of these borrowed names had themselves chosenthem on the day in which, from caprice, discontent, or want offortune, they had donned the simple Musketeer's uniform.>From the moment we had no rest till we could find some trace incontemporary works of these extraordinary names which had sostrongly awakened our curiosity.

    The catalogue alone of the books we read with this object wouldfill a whole chapter, which, although it might be veryinstructive, would certainly afford our readers but littleamusement.  It will suffice, then, to tell them that at themoment at which, discouraged by so many fruitless investigations,we were about to abandon our search, we at length found, guidedby the counsels of our illustrious friend Paulin Paris, amanuscript in folio, endorsed 4772 or 4773, we do not recollectwhich, having for title, "Memoirs of the Comte de la Fere,Touching Some Events Which Passed in France Toward the End of theReign of King Louis XIII and the Commencement of the Reign ofKing Louis XIV."

    It may be easily imagined how great was our joy when, in turningover this manuscript, our last hope, we found at the twentiethpage the name of Athos, at the twenty-seventh the name ofPorthos, and at the thirty-first the name of Aramis.The discovery of a completely unknown manuscript at a period inwhich historical science is carried to such a high degreeappeared almost miraculous.  We hastened, therefore, to obtainpermission to print it, with the view of presenting ourselvessomeday with the pack of others at the doors of the Academie desInscriptions et Belles Lettres, if we should not succeed--a veryprobable thing, by the by--in gaining admission to the AcademieFrancaise with our own proper pack.  This permission, we feelbound to say, was graciously granted; which compels us here togive a public contradiction to the slanderers who pretend that welive under a government but moderately indulgent to men ofletters.

    Now, this is the first part of this precious manuscript which weoffer to our readers, restoring it to the title which belongs toit, and entering into an engagement that if (of which we have nodoubt) this first part should obtain the success it merits, wewill publish the second immediately.

    In the meanwhile, as the godfather is a second father, we beg thereader to lay to our account, and not to that of the Comte de laFere, the pleasure or the ENNUI he may experience.This being understood, let us proceed with our history.XFIR MZ 